Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis of gain of function (BOU) bountiful mutant bs wild type arabidopsis plants using rosette leaf tissue	
Comment[Submitted Name]	Higher order transcriptional regulation conferred by the bountiful gain_of_function mutant	
Experimental Design	strain_or_line_design	transcription profiling by array	
Experimental Design Term Source REF	mo	EFO	
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]		
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3	
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-NASC-4	
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-10-14 01:41:08 Last Changed Rev: 14677	
Experimental Factor Name	genetic_modification	
Experimental Factor Type	genetic_modification	
Experimental Factor Term Source REF	
Person Last Name	unknown	Greco	
Person First Name	unknown	Raffaella	
Person Mid Initials	
Person Email		r.greco@plant.wag-ur.nl	
Person Phone	+44 (0)115 951 3091	
Person Fax	+44 (0)115 951 3297	
Person Address	Plant Science Division, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonnington Campus, Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK	Business Unit Genomics Plant Research International Postbus 16 Wageningen 6700 AA The Netherlands 	
Person Affiliation		Plant Research International	
Person Roles		investigator;biosource_provider;submitter	
Person Roles Term Source REF		mo	
Quality Control Type	
Quality Control Term Source REF	
Replicate Type	
Replicate Term Source REF	
Normalization Type	
Normalization Term Source REF	
Date of Experiment	
Public Release Date	
PubMed ID	
Publication DOI	
Publication Author List	
Publication Title	
Publication Status	
Publication Status Term Source REF	
Experiment Description	In recent years our group has been constructing an activation tag library based on the En-I transposon system which resulted in the identification of novel Arabidopsis mutants (Marsch Martinez et al 2002; manuscript accepted for publication in Plant Phys). Among them the bountiful (bou) mutant showed dominant alterations in leaf size and morphology, delayed flowering, vertically oriented siliques and higher yield. Sequence analysis of the genomic region flanking the transposon insertion in combination with expression analysis indicated that the mutant phenotype observed was presumably caused by over-expression of a gene encoding a yet uncharacterised DNA binding protein. In particular over-expression in the activation tagged mutant seems to cause ectopic expression of the BOU gene in all vegetative and reproductive tissues while the endogenous pattern of expression appeared to be restricted only to root tissue. Over-expression lines in which the BOU ORF was driven by the 35S promoter displayed the bountiful phenotype confirming that the activation tagged phenotype was indeed caused by activation of the BOU gene. Protein sequence analysis indicates a putative role for BOU as a chromatin remodelling factor which in association with the expression pattern suggests a possible involvement of BOU in high-hierarchy order of regulation of gene expression. Hence microarrays could be very useful for the identification of downstream interacting factors or target geneswhich will help us to gain insights towards unravelling the biological role of the BOU gene. The specific interaction to flowering time genes will be studied independently using RT-PCR to reveal the relationship to other genes in the regulatory pathway. As experimental setup we intend to compare gene expression between bountiful mutant and wild-type arabidopsis plants using rosette leaf tissue as source for RNA. Though the BOU gene is endogenously expressed in a root-specific mannerits ectopic expression in the bountiful mutant phenotipically affects the whole plant including leaves.	
Protocol Name	NASCGrowProt:124	NASCGrowProt:125	NASCExtractProtocol:1	NASCLabelProtocol:1	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-EukGE-WS2v4	Affymetrix:Protocol:Percentile	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat	
Protocol Type			nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation	
Protocol Description			Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol 	RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70°C for 10 minutes.  First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ß-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.	Title: Fluidics Station Protocol. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL Analysis (Percentile). Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 	
Protocol Parameters	Temperature;Location;Light;Medium;Humidity;Atmosphere;	Location;Temperature;Light;Medium;Atmosphere;Humidity;	
Protocol Hardware	
Protocol Software					MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact	
Protocol Term Source REF							The MGED Ontology	
SDRF File	E-NASC-4.sdrf.txt	
Term Source Name	ncbitax	ArrayExpress	mo	EFO	The MGED Ontology	
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/taxonomyhome.html	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version						
