Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-17845							
Public Release Date	2009-10-31							
Investigation Title	Transcriptional profiling of leaf blades and petioles subjected to shade avoidance syndrome							
Comment[Submitted Name]	Transcriptional profiling of leaf blades and petioles subjected to shade avoidance syndrome							
Experiment Description	Plants grown under a canopy recognize changes in light quality and modify their growth patterns; this modification is known as shade avoidance syndrome. In leaves, leaf blade expansion is suppressed, whereas petiole elongation is promoted under the shade. However, the mechanisms that control these responses are largely unclear. Here, we demonstrated that both auxin and brassinosteroid (BR) are required for the normal leaf responses to shade. The microarray analysis of leaf blades and petioles treated with end-of-day far-red light (EODFR) revealed that almost half of the genes induced by the treatment in both parts were previously identified as auxin-responsive genes. Likewise, BR-responsive genes were overrepresented in the EODFR-induced genes. Hence, the auxin and BR responses were elevated by EODFR treatment in both leaf blades and petioles, although opposing growth responses were observed in these two parts. The analysis of the auxin-deficient doc1/big mutant and BR-deficient rot3/cyp90c1 mutant further indicates that auxin and BR were equally required for the normal petiole elongation response to the shade stimulus. In addition, the spotlight irradiation experiment revealed that phytochrome in leaf blades but not that in petioles regulated petiole elongation, which was probably mediated through regulation of the auxin/BR responses in petioles. On the basis of these findings, we conclude that auxin and BR cooperatively promote petiole elongation in response to the shade stimulus under the control of phytochrome in the leaf blade. The WT seedlings were grown for 19 days under continuous white light condition before experimental treatment with three light conditions. Seedlings were either maintained in white light for 2 h (WL), incubated in the dark condition for 2 h (D), or experienced a pulse irradiation of FR light before incubated in the dark condition for 2 h (FRD). Total RNAs were separately prepared from leaf blades and petioles after each light treatment. Three independent biological replicates were used.							
Date of Experiment								
Term Source Name	EFO							
Term Source Version								
Term Source File	http://efo.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/efo/trunk/src/efoinowl/efo.owl							
Person Last Name	Kozuka	Kozuka	Demura					
Person First Name	Toshiaki	Toshiaki	Taku					
Person Mid Initials								
Person Email	geo@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov							
Person Affiliation	Kyoto University							
Person Phone								
Person Fax								
Person Address	Department of Botany, Kyoto University, Oiwakecho, Kitashirakawa, Sakyoku, Kyoto, Japan							
Person Roles	submitter							
Person Roles Term Source REF								
Person Roles Term Accession Number								
Normalization Type								
Normalization Term Accession Number								
Normalization Term Source REF								
Replicate Type								
Replicate Term Accession Number								
Replicate Term Source REF								
Experimental Design								
Experimental Design Term Accession Number								
Experimental Design Term Source REF								
Quality Control Type								
Quality Control Term Accession Number								
Quality Control Term Source REF								
Protocol Name	P-GSE17845-1	P-GSE17845-6	P-GSE17845-3	P-GSE17845-8	P-GSE17845-7	P-GSE17845-2	P-GSE17845-4	P-GSE17845-5
Protocol Description	ID_REF = <br>VALUE = GeneSpring-normalized signal intensity<br>DETECTION P-VALUE = <br>ABS_CALL = 	Followed Affymetrix experimental procedure. 200 micro liter of hybrization solution was used for 16 hrs at 45°C.	Seedlings were grown at 22 degrees on rocklwools under continuous white light for 19 days.	Array data were processed and analyzed with Microarray Suites 5.0 software (Affymetrix) and GeneSpring 7.3 (Agilent). Data values were normalized per chip to the 50th percentile and per gene to the median of that gene measurement in WL2.	GeneChips were scanned using the Gene Array Scanner (Agilent).	Seedlings were either treated with white light for 2 h (WL), incubated in the dark condition for 2 h (D), or pulse irradiation of FR light before incubated in the dark condition for 2 h (FRD).	Total RNA was separately prepared from leaf blades and petioles using Sepazol RNA I super kit (Nacalai Tesque), and  purified with  RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions.	Followed Affymetrix experimental procedure. Biotinylated cRNA were prepared according to the standard Affymetrix protocol from 10 microg total RNA.
Protocol Software								
Protocol Hardware								
Protocol Contact								
Protocol Type	bioassay_data_transformation	hybridization	grow	feature_extraction	image_aquisition	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling
Protocol Term Source REF								
Protocol Term Accession Number								
Experimental Factor Name	organism part	growth condition						
Experimental Factor Type	organism part	growth condition						
Experimental Factor Term Source REF								
Experimental Factor Term Accession Number								
Publication Title	Involvement of auxin and brassinosteroid in the regulation of petiole elongation under the shade.							
Publication Author List	Kozuka T, Kobayashi J, Horiguchi G, Demura T, Sakakibara H, Tsukaya H, Nagatani A							
PubMed ID	20538889							
Publication DOI	10.1104/pp.110.156802							
Publication Status	published							
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO							
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796							
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE17845							
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2010-08-22							
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis subjected to far-red light pulse treatment							
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array							
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2009-11-01							
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2009-08-26							
SDRF File	E-GEOD-17845.sdrf.txt							
