Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis response to Erysiphe orontii infection - AtGenExpress																	
Comment[Submitted Name]	AtGenExpress: Pathogen Series: Response to Erysiphe orontii infection																	
Experimental Design	time series design																	
Experimental Design Term Source REF																		
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array																	
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis after inoculation with Erysiphe orontii																	
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14																	
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE5686																	
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4																	
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-5686																	
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 18:14:50 Last Changed Rev: 13058																	
Experimental Factor Name	inoculation	treatment time																
Experimental Factor Type	infect	time																
Experimental Factor Term Source REF																		
Person Last Name	(NASC)																	
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre																	
Person Mid Initials																		
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info																	
Person Phone																		
Person Fax																		
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom																	
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)																	
Person Roles	submitter																	
Person Roles Term Source REF																		
Quality Control Type																		
Quality Control Term Source REF																		
Replicate Type																		
Replicate Term Source REF																		
Normalization Type																		
Normalization Term Source REF																		
Date of Experiment																		
Public Release Date	2008-06-14																	
PubMed ID																		
Publication DOI																		
Publication Author List																		
Publication Title																		
Publication Status																		
Publication Status Term Source REF																		
Experiment Description	AtGenExpress:  A multinational coordinated effort to uncover the transcriptome of the multicellular model organism Arabidopsis thaliana; The activity of genes and their encoded products can be regulated in several ways, but transcription is the primary level, since all other modes of regulation (RNA splicing, RNA and protein stability, etc.) are dependent on a gene being transcribed in the first place. The importance of transcriptional regulation has been underscored by the recent flood of global expression analyses, which have confirmed that transcriptional co-regulation of genes that act together is the norm, not the exception. Moreover, many studies suggest that evolutionary change is driven in large part by modifications of transcriptional programs. An essential first step toward deciphering the transcriptional code is to determine the expression pattern of all genes. With this goal in mind, an international effort to develop a gene expression atlas of Arabidopsis has been underway since fall 2003. This project, dubbed AtGenExpress, is funded by the DFG, and will provide the Arabidopsis community with access to a large set of Affymetrix microarray data. As part of this collaboration, we have generated expression data from 80 biologicaly different samples in triplicate. Responses to E. orontii infection were assayed in wild-type Col-0 plants at 6, 12, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hours after inoculation of adult leaves. Inoculation was done via settling tower, using 10 day old E. orontii cultures. Leaves number 7 to 10 were selected for profiling. Experimenter name = Fred Ausubel  , Julia Dewdney; Experimenter institute = AtGenExpress Experiment Overall Design: 48 samples were used in this experiment																	
Protocol Name	P-G5686-6	P-G5686-13	P-G5686-11	P-G5686-3	P-G5686-7	P-G5686-16	P-G5686-2	P-G5686-4	P-G5686-15	P-G5686-1	P-G5686-10	P-G5686-9	P-G5686-14	P-G5686-12	P-G5686-8	P-G5686-5	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	Plants were mock-inoculated by placing in settling towers for 15 minutes, then returned to the growth chamber. At 4 days post-mock-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were inoculated via settling tower with 10-day old cultures of Erysiphe orontii.  At 18 hours post-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were inoculated via settling tower with 10-day old cultures of Erysiphe orontii.  At 12 hours post-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were inoculated via settling tower with 10-day old cultures of Erysiphe orontii.  At 3 days post-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were inoculated via settling tower with 10-day old cultures of Erysiphe orontii.  At 5 days post-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were mock-inoculated by placing in settling towers for 15 minutes, then returned to the growth chamber. At 24 hours post-mock-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were mock-inoculated by placing in settling towers for 15 minutes, then returned to the growth chamber. At 2 days post-mock-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were mock-inoculated by placing in settling towers for 15 minutes, then returned to the growth chamber. At 3 days post-mock-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were inoculated via settling tower with 10-day old cultures of Erysiphe orontii.  At 24 hours post-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were inoculated via settling tower with 10-day old cultures of Erysiphe orontii.  At 2 days post-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were mock-inoculated by placing in settling towers for 15 minutes, then returned to the growth chamber. At 6 hours post-mock-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were inoculated via settling tower with 10-day old cultures of Erysiphe orontii. At 6 hours post-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were mock-inoculated by placing in settling towers for 15 minutes, then returned to the growth chamber. At 18 hours post-mock-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were mock-inoculated by placing in settling towers for 15 minutes, then returned to the growth chamber. At 12 hours post-mock-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were mock-inoculated by placing in settling towers for 15 minutes, then returned to the growth chamber. At 5 days post-mock-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Plants were inoculated via settling tower with 10-day old cultures of Erysiphe orontii.  At 4 days post-inoculation, leaves number 7 to 10 were harvested. All harvests were done in the middle of the light period.	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters																		
Protocol Hardware																		
Protocol Software																	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact																		
Protocol Term Source REF																		
SDRF File	E-GEOD-5686.sdrf.txt																	
Term Source Name	EFO																	
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/																	
Term Source Version																		
