Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-63185
MAGE-TAB Version	1.1						
Public Release Date	2016-06-30
Investigation Title	RNA-DIRECTED DNA METHYLATION 4 modulates cold stress resistance in Arabidopsis through the C-REPEAT-BINDING FACTOR-mediated pathway [Affymetrix]						
Comment[Submitted Name]	RNA-DIRECTED DNA METHYLATION 4 modulates cold stress resistance in Arabidopsis through the C-REPEAT-BINDING FACTOR-mediated pathway [Affymetrix]
Experiment Description	The C-REPEAT-BINDING FACTOR (CBF) pathway has important roles in plant responses to cold stress. Previous research documented that constitutively expressed upstream transcription factors are activated by cold stress to induce the expression of CBF genes and the resulting CBF proteins trigger the expression of downstream cold responsive genes that confer freezing tolerance. In the present study, we found that dysfunction of RNA-DIRECTED DNA METHYLATION 4 (RDM4), which encodes a protein that associates with RNA polymerases Pol IV and Pol V as well as Pol II, and is required for RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) and proper plant development in Arabidopsis, reduced chilling and freezing tolerance in Arabidopsis as evidenced by decreased survival and increased electrolyte leakage under cold stress conditions. CBFs and CBF regulon genes were down-regulated in rdm4 but not nrpe1 (the largest subunit of PolV) mutant plants, suggesting that the role of RDM4 in cold stress responses is independent of the RdDM pathway. Overexpression of RDM4 increased the expression of CBFs and CBF regulon genes and decreased cold-induced membrane injury. The rdm4 mutants exhibited decreased antioxidant enzyme activities and increased accumulation of reactive oxygen species. Microarray analysis indicated that a great proportion of genes affected by rdm4 overlapped with those affected by CBF2 and CBF3 in Arabidopsis. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) results suggested that RDM4 is important for Pol II occupancy at the promoters of CBF genes but not the promoters of up-stream regulators of CBFs. Together, these data indicate that RDM4 acts as a component of a Pol II transcription complex that regulates CBF gene expression and cold stress resistance in Arabidopsis. Two-week-old seedlings of rdm4 and C24 WT plant were subjected to chilling treatment for 0, 3, and 48 h treatments.Plant materials were then collected for RNA extraction.						
Term Source Name	ArrayExpress	EFO
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl					
Person Last Name	Chan	Chan	Zhu				
Person First Name	Zhulong	Zhulong	Jian-Kang				
Person Email	zhulongch@wbgcas.cn						
Person Affiliation	Chinese Academy of Sciences						
Person Address	Wuhan Botanic Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Moshan, Wuchang District, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China						
Person Roles	submitter						
Protocol Name	P-GSE63185-1	P-GSE63185-5	P-GSE63185-6	P-GSE63185-2	P-GSE63185-3	P-GSE63185-4	P-GSE63185-7
Protocol Description	All of the raw data (*.CEL files) were then analyzed using the affylmGUI package in the statistical computing environment R All genes with a P value < 0.05 and a fold-change > 2 were chosen for further analysis ID_REF =  VALUE = RMA	Total RNA from rdm4 and C24 WT seedlings with or without cold treatment (0, 3 or 48 h) was and used to make biotin-labeled cRNA targets. Two biological replicates from different growth chambers were prepared for each combination of ecotype and cold treatment.	Fragmented cRNAs (15 μg) were hybridized to the 24K GeneChip Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array (Affymetrix) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.	Two-week-old seedlings were transferred to 4 degree for 0, 3, and 48 h. Plant materials were then collected for RNA extraction.	Arabidopsis seeds of rdm4 mutant and Col WT were sown in MS plates and grown at 23/18°C in a growth room with a 16-h light/8-h dark cycle at 150 μmol m-2s-1 and 70% relative humidity	Total RNA was extracted and purified from leaves of at least 30 seedlings per plate using QIAGEN-RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to guidelines specified by the manufacturer. Two biological replicates were prepared for each combination. RNA was quantified using a Nanodrop-ND 8000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and RNA quality was assessed by agarose gel analysis and using a 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples with the RNA integrity number of 7.5 and above were chosen for further analysis.	The arrays were scanned with a GeneChip® Scanner 3000 (Affymetrix), and raw image files were converted to probe set data (*.CEL files), using the Affymetrix GeneChip® Operating Software according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Protocol Type	normalization data transformation protocol	labelling protocol	hybridization protocol	sample treatment protocol	growth protocol	nucleic acid extraction protocol	array scanning protocol
Experimental Factor Name	genotype						
Experimental Factor Type	genotype						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE63185						
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2016-06-30						
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2014-11-12						
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2016-06-30						
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
SDRF File	E-GEOD-63185.sdrf.txt
