Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis HsfA2 knockout plants response to heat shock	
Comment[Submitted Name]	Heat shock response of HsfA2 knockout plants	
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array	
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO	
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-13	
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE4760	
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3	
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-4760	
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-05 17:22:48 Last Changed Rev: 13058	
Experimental Factor Name	
Experimental Factor Type	
Experimental Factor Term Source REF	
Person Last Name	Charng	
Person First Name	Yee-yung	
Person Mid Initials	
Person Email	yycharng@gate.sinica.edu.tw	
Person Phone	
Person Fax	
Person Address	Yee-yung Charng,Inst. BioAgric. Sci.,Academia Sinica,128, Academia Rd. Sec. 2,Taipei,11529,Taiwan	
Person Affiliation	Academia Sinica	
Person Roles	submitter	
Person Roles Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology	
Quality Control Type	
Quality Control Term Source REF	
Replicate Type	
Replicate Term Source REF	
Normalization Type	
Normalization Term Source REF	
Date of Experiment	
Public Release Date	2008-06-13	
PubMed ID	17085506	
Publication DOI	17085506	
Publication Author List	Yee-Yung Charng, Hsiang-Chin Liu, Nai-Yu Liu, Wen-Tzu Chi, Chun-Neng Wang, Shih-Hsun Chang, Tsu-Tsuen Wang	
Publication Title	A heat-inducible transcription factor, HsfA2, is required for extension of acquired thermotolerance in Arabidopsis.	
Publication Status	journal_article	
Publication Status Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology	
Experiment Description	The expression of heat-shock proteins (Hsps) induced by a non-lethal heat treatment confers acquired thermotolerance (AT) to organisms against a subsequent challenge of otherwise lethal temperature. After stress signal lifted, AT gradually decayed with the decline of Hsps during recovery period. The duration of AT may be critical for sessile organisms, such as plants, to survive repeated heat stress in the environment. To identify heat-induced genes involved in duration of AT, we took a reverse-genetics approach by screening for Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion mutants that show decreased thermotolerance after a long recovery at non-stress condition following a conditioning treatment. Among the tested mutants corresponding to 47 genes, only the HsfA2 knockout mutant showed significant phenotype. The mutant plants were more sensitive to severe heat stress than the wild type after long but not short recovery following a pretreatment at 37oC, which can be complemented by introducing a wild-type copy of the gene. Quantitative hypocotyl elongation assay also revealed that AT decayed faster in the absence of HsfA2. Significant decline of the transcript levels of several highly heat-induced genes was observed in the HsfA2 knockout plants after a 4-h recovery or after 2 h of prolonged heat stress.  Immunoblot anlysis showed that Hsa32 and class I small Hsp were lower in the mutant than in the wild type after a long recovery.  Our results suggest that HsfA2 as a heat-induced transactivator sustains the post-stress expression of Hsp genes and extends the duration of AT in Arabidopsis. Experiment Overall Design: Total RNA was isolated from the seedlings of 5-d old wild-type and HsfA2 knockout mutant seedlings (a pool of about 100 plants per treatment in duplicates) harvested immediately after heat shock treatment.  In this experiment, total 12 chips were used, 1 each for 2 biological replicates of the control and HS-treated samples for the wild type and mutant plants.	
Protocol Name	
Protocol Type	
Protocol Description	
Protocol Parameters	
Protocol Hardware	
Protocol Software	
Protocol Contact	
Protocol Term Source REF	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-4760.sdrf.txt	
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology	
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version						
