Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-29771
Public Release Date	2011-12-31									
Investigation Title	Synergistic Repression of Embryonic Program by SET DOMAIN GROUP 8 and EMBRYONIC FLOWER 2 in Arabidopsis Seedlings									
Comment[Submitted Name]	Synergistic Repression of Embryonic Program by SET DOMAIN GROUP 8 and EMBRYONIC FLOWER 2 in Arabidopsis Seedlings
Experiment Description	The seed maturation program occurs only during late phase of embryo development and repression of the maturation genes is pivotal for seedling development. However, mechanisms that repress the expression of this program in vegetative tissues are not well understood. A genetic screen was performed for mutants that express maturation genes in leaves. Here, it is shown that mutations affecting SDG8 (SET DOMAIN GROUP 8), a putative histone methyltransferase, cause ectopic expression of a subset of maturation genes in leaves. Further, to investigate the relationship between SDG8 and the Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins, which are known to repress many developmentally important genes including seed maturation genes, double mutants was made and formation of somatic embryos was observed on mutant seedlings with mutations in both SDG8 and EMF2 (EMBRYONIC FLOWER 2). Interestingly, double mutant of sdg8 and mutations in VRN2 (VERNALIZATION 2), a paralog of EMF2, grow and develop normally to maturity. Analysis of histone methylation status at chromatins of a number of maturation loci revealed synergistic effect of emf2 and sdg8 on the deposition of the active histone mark, trimethylation of lysine 4 on histone 3 (H3K4me3), which is consistent with high expression of these genes (formation of somatic embryos) in emf2 sdg8 double mutants. These observations demonstrate a functional cooperative interplay between SDG8 and an EMF2-containing PcG complex in maintaining vegetative cell identity by repressing seed genes to promote seedling development. The work also indicates the functional specificities of PcG complexes in Arabidopsis. Total RNA was isolated from three independent biological replicates of Wild type (ProÎ²CG:GUS) and two independent biological replicates of sdg8-2 and essp4/sdg8-5, respectively. Four ATH1 chips were used for the two mutants and three for the wild type.  Matrices comprising the signal intensity value of each gene per replicate hybridization and the averaged data of each gene generated from three replicate hybridizations of the wild type and two replicate hybridizations of mutant samples, respectively, are linked below as supplementary files.									
Date of Experiment										
Term Source Name	EFO
Term Source Version										
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl									
Person Last Name	Tang	Tang	Pelletier	Tang	Nguyen	Keller	Wang	Rothstein	Harada	Cui
Person First Name	Xurong	Xurong	Julie	Mingjuan	Vi	Wilfred	Aiming	Steven	John	Yuhai
Person Mid Initials						A		J	J	
Person Email	xurong.tang@uoit.ca									
Person Affiliation	Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada									
Person Phone										
Person Fax										
Person Address	Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 1391 Sandford Street, London, Canada									
Person Roles	submitter									
Person Roles Term Source REF										
Person Roles Term Accession Number										
Normalization Type										
Normalization Term Accession Number										
Normalization Term Source REF										
Replicate Type										
Replicate Term Accession Number										
Replicate Term Source REF										
Experimental Design										
Experimental Design Term Accession Number										
Experimental Design Term Source REF										
Quality Control Type										
Quality Control Term Accession Number										
Quality Control Term Source REF										
Protocol Name	P-GSE29771-1	P-GSE29771-6	P-GSE29771-3	P-GSE29771-8	P-GSE29771-7	P-GSE29771-2	P-GSE29771-4	P-GSE29771-5		
Protocol Description	ID_REF = <br>VALUE = median-normalized signal	Labelling, hybridization, and detection were performed in McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre (http://genomequebec.mcgill.ca).	All plants were grown under 16-h-light (22°C)/8-h-dark (20°C) cycles, either grown on soil or on plates with MS media containing 1.5% sucrose and 0.8% agar with appropriate selection markers. All seeds were vernalized at 4oC for 3 days before placement in a growth environment.	MAS 5.0 raw data were generated by FLEXARRAY provided by McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre. The raw MAS 5.0 data files obtained from scanned array images are then imported into GeneSpring 7.3.1 (Silicon Genetics). Only genes with Present (P) calls were included in the analysis. Raw signals of each gene were normalized with the median of all measurements on the chip. The average normalized value of the signal intensity for each gene in three replicate hybridization experiments was adopted as the expression value of the gene. The normalized values were used to identify the differentially regulated genes by calculating the log2 ratios, where the normalized mean intensity values of sdg8 were divided by respective values from ProÎ²CG:GUS. Fold changes of differentially regulated genes in sdg8 compared with ProÎ²CG:GUS were calculated from these ratios.For multiple comparisons among slides, a false discovery rate (FDR) multiple testing correction (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) was applied to generate adjusted p-values in GeneSpring 7.3.1 Using a FDR at 5% (p-value=0.05), we selected only the statistically significant genes that were regarded as differentially regulated only if their fold-change was â‰¥ 2.0 for up- and â‰¤ -2.0 fold for downregulated.	Labelling, hybridization, and detection were performed in McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre (http://genomequebec.mcgill.ca).	Leaves were harvested at 14 days after placing on growth conditions and ground on liquid nitrogen.	Total RNA was isolated in three biological replicates from leaves of two-week-old wild type (ProÎ²CG:GUS) and two biological replicates from mutants (essp4/sdg8-5, sdg8-2) seedlings grown on MS agar plates (1.5% sucrose) using the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (QIAGEN).	Labelling, hybridization, and detection were performed in McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre (http://genomequebec.mcgill.ca).		
Protocol Software										
Protocol Hardware										
Protocol Contact										
Protocol Type	bioassay_data_transformation	hybridization	grow	feature_extraction	image_aquisition	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling		
Protocol Term Source REF										
Protocol Term Accession Number										
Experimental Factor Name	VARIATION									
Experimental Factor Type	variation									
Experimental Factor Term Source REF										
Experimental Factor Term Accession Number										
Publication Title	Synergistic repression of the embryonic programme by SET DOMAIN GROUP 8 and EMBRYONIC FLOWER 2 in Arabidopsis seedlings.									
Publication Author List	Tang X, Lim MH, Pelletier J, Tang M, Nguyen V, Keller WA, Tsang EW, Wang A, Rothstein SJ, Harada JJ, Cui Y									
PubMed ID	22162868									
Publication DOI	10.1093/jxb/err383									
Publication Status										
Publication Status Term Source REF										
Publication Status Term Accession Number										
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE29771									
Comment[AdditionalFile:Data1]	GSE29771_WT_and_sdg8-2.txt									
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2012-03-23
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array									
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2011-12-31
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2011-06-06
Comment[AdditionalFile:Data2]	GSE29771_WT_and_sdg8-5.txt									
SDRF File	E-GEOD-29771.sdrf.txt
