Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis LEC1-overexpressing transgenic plants reveals LEAFY COTYLEDON1 is a key regulator of fatty acid biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana						
Comment[Submitted Name]	LEAFY COTYLEDON1 is a key regulator of fatty acid biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana						
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array					
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO					
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis expressing LEC1 under the control of the ER8 promoter after treatment with estradiol						
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4						
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-10-25						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE12137						
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-12137						
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-07-22 08:07:12 Last Changed Rev: 13058						
Experimental Factor Name	COMPOUND						
Experimental Factor Type	compound						
Experimental Factor Term Source REF							
Person Last Name	Mu						
Person First Name	Jinye						
Person Mid Initials							
Person Email	jymou@genetics.ac.cn						
Person Phone							
Person Fax							
Person Address	Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology,CAS, Datun Road, Chaoyang District,Beijing,China, Beijing, 100101, China						
Person Affiliation	Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology,CAS						
Person Roles	submitter						
Person Roles Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology						
Quality Control Type							
Quality Control Term Source REF							
Replicate Type							
Replicate Term Source REF							
Normalization Type							
Normalization Term Source REF							
Date of Experiment							
Public Release Date	2008-10-25						
PubMed ID	18689444						
Publication DOI	10.1104/pp.108.126342						
Publication Author List	Tan Mu, Fu Zheng, Zhang Liang, Wang Yang, Wang Chong,  Zuo						
Publication Title	LEAFY COTYLEDON1 is a key regulator of fatty acid biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana.						
Publication Status	published						
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO						
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796						
Experiment Description	In plants, fatty acids are de novo synthesized predominantly in plastids fromacetyl-CoA. Although fatty acid biosynthesis has been biochemically well-studied, little isknown about the regulatory mechanisms of the pathway. Here, we show that overexpressionof the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) LEAFY COTYLEDON1 (LEC1) gene causesglobally increased expression of fatty acid biosynthetic genes, which are involved in keyreactions of condensation, chain elongation and desaturation of fatty acid biosynthesis. Inthe plastidial fatty acid synthetic pathway, over 58% of known enzyme-coding genes areupregulated in LEC1-overexpressing transgenic plants, including those encoding threesubunits of acetyl-CoA carboxylase, a key enzyme controlling the fatty acid biosynthesisflux. Moreover, genes involved in glycolysis and lipid accumulation are also upregulated.Consistent with these results, levels of major fatty acid species and lipids were substantiallyincreased in the transgenic plants. Genetic analysis indicates that the LEC1 function ispartially dependent on ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE3, FUSCA3 and WRINKLED1 in theregulation of fatty acid biosynthesis. Moreover, a similar phenotype was observed intransgenic Arabidopsis plants overexpressing two LEC1-like genes of Brassica napus.These results suggest that LEC1 and LEC1-like genes act as key regulators to coordinate theexpression of fatty acid biosynthetic genes, thereby representing a promising target forgenetic improvement of oil-production plants. Experiment Overall Design: The pER8-LEC1 transgenic seedlings were germinated and grown in the presence of 10 µM estradiol for 4 days. The control sample was germinated and grown under the identical conditions without estradiol but containing 0.1% DMSO. Total RNA was prepared from fresh or frozen plant materials using the RNAeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen China, Beijing). The first strand cDNA was synthesized, and then hybridized with the ATH1 oligonucleotide chips as described by the manufacture’s instructions (Affymetrix). The microarray hybridization data were collected and analyzed using related R (http://www.r-project.org/) packages provided by Bioconductor (http://www.biocoductor.org/). In brief, genes differentially expressed between wild type and mutant plants were selected by first removing “absent” genes which were never detected to be expressed in the experiments, then a two-side t-test was applied to remaining genes in order to test the expression difference between wide type and mutant plants. To avoid multiple testing problems, raw p-values were then adjusted into False Discovery Rate (FDR) using Benjamini and Hochberg approach. Finally, differentially expressed genes were defined as those FDR less than 0.2. Functional analysis of differentially expressed genes was carried out using the biological process category of Arabidopsis Gene Ontology. The hierarchical map of GO annotation was constructed according to the ontology tree provided by the Gene Ontology website (http://www.geneontology.com) as described previously (Zheng and Wang, 2008). Ontology categories that are significantly enriched among differentially expressed genes (hypergeometric test and FDR less than 0.1) were displayed as boxes in the map.						
Protocol Name	P-G12137-1	P-G12137-5	P-G12137-2	P-G12137-4	P-G12137-3	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	grow	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	Seeds were surface sterilized with 10% Bleach for 5 minutes and then rinsed 3 times with sterile water.Standard media is 0.5X concentration Murashige and Skoog salt mixture (Sigma),  3% sucrose, 0.8% agar and adjusted to pH 5.7 with KOH. The plate was kept at 4oC for 2-3 days and then transferred to a tissue culture room germinated and grown at 22oC under continuous white light.	Transgenic plants seeds were sowed on 1/2 MS medium plus chemical inducer (estradiol). Seedlings were grown for 4 days. Whole seedlings were collected into RNA extraction buffer. Approximately 100 mg were collected per replicate, with two biological replicates being performed.	Transgenic plants seeds were sowed on 1/2 MS medium plus 0.1% DMSO. Seedlings were grown for 4 days. Whole seedlings were collected into RNA extraction buffer. Approximately 100 mg were collected per replicate, with two biological replicates being performed.	Approximately 100 mg plants were collected per replicate. Samples were briefly sonicated to disrupt the tissue. RNA was extracted using the RNAeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen GmbH).	Fragmented cRNA probes were prepared using the two-cycle amplification protocol by Affymetrix.	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters							
Protocol Hardware							
Protocol Software						MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact							
Protocol Term Source REF						mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-12137.sdrf.txt						
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version							
