Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of expression diversity in Arabidopsis thaliana							
Comment[Submitted Name]	Genomic survey of gene expression diversity in Arabidopsis thaliana							
Experimental Design	time series design	compound treatment design	strain or line design	growth chamber study				
Experimental Design Term Source REF	EFO	EFO	EFO	EO				
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2005-10-26							
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4							
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-TABM-51							
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-09-07 04:02:03 Last Changed Rev: 13833							
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array							
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of seven ecotypes of Arabidopsis thaliana after time course treatment with salicylic acid.							
Experimental Factor Name	ecotype	growth condition	time					
Experimental Factor Type	ecotype	growth condition	time					
Experimental Factor Term Source REF								
Person Last Name	West	Michelmore	Kim	Doerge	Kliebenstein	St Clair	St. Clair	van Leeuwen
Person First Name	Marilyn	Richard	Kyunga	R	Daniel	Dina	Dina	Hans
Person Mid Initials	A.L.	W.		W.	J.	A.		
Person Email							dastclair@ucdavis.edu	
Person Phone								
Person Fax								
Person Address								
Person Affiliation							UC Davis Plant Sciences	
Person Roles							submitter	
Person Roles Term Source REF								
Replicate Type								
Replicate Term Source REF								
Normalization Type								
Normalization Term Source REF								
Date of Experiment								
Public Release Date	2005-10-26							
PubMed ID	17630278							
Publication DOI	10.1105/tpc.107.050641							
Publication Author List	van Leeuwen H, Kliebenstein DJ, West MA, Kim K, van Poecke R, Katagiri F, Michelmore RW, Doerge RW, St Clair DA.							
Publication Title	Natural Variation among Arabidopsis thaliana Accessions for Transcriptome Response to Exogenous Salicylic Acid							
Publication Status	published							
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO							
Experiment Description	The study of natural genetic variation for plant disease resistance responses is a complementary approach to utilizing mutants to elucidate genetic pathways.  While some key genes involved in pathways controlling disease resistance, and signaling intermediates such as salicylic acid and jasmonic acid, have been identified through mutational analyses, the use of genetic variation in natural populations permits the identification of change-of-function alleles, which likely act in a quantitative manner.  Whole genome microarrays, such as Affymetrix GeneChips, allow for molecular characterization of the disease response at a genomics level and characterization of differences in gene expression due to natural variation.  Differences in the level of gene expression, or expression level polymorphisms (ELPs), can be mapped in a segregating population to identify regulatory quantitative trait loci (expression QTLs) affecting host resistance responses.  In order to identify an appropriate RIL population to map QTL controlling disease resistance responses, we performed a parental survey of 7 different Arabidopsis accessions.  We treated vegetatively grown plants with either salicylic acid or a control solution, and harvested the plants at 3 different time points after chemical treatment.  We present Affymetrix GeneChip microarray expression data for 3 biological replications of this parental survey							
Protocol Name	P-TABM-102	P-TABM-103	P-TABM-104	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-EukGE-WS2v4	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-EukGE-WS2v3	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-P-TABM-hans6	P-AFFY-6	
Protocol Type	growth protocol	nucleic acid extraction protocol	nucleic acid labeling protocol	nucleic acid hybridization to array protocol	nucleic acid hybridization to array protocol	nucleic acid hybridization to array protocol	array scanning protocol	
Protocol Description	Seeds of seven Arabidopsis thaliana accessions (Col-0, Cvi-1, Est, Kin-0, Mt-0, Tsu-1, and Van-0) were provided by J. Chory, Salk Institute, San Diego, CA. These accessions can also be obtained from NASC (http://arabidopsis.info) and TAIR (www.arabidopsis.org).  A factorial experiment was conducted with three biological replicates of the seven accessions. The replications were performed on 3 different dates per accession, due to space limitations in the growth chambers. For each biological replicate, multiple plants (~30) per accession were grown in a growth chamber under short day conditions (8 hr light at 100-120 microEinsteins, 20 degrees C day/20 degrees C night) to maintain plants in the vegetative phase for six to seven weeks.  The growth chambers used a combination of metal halide, mercury vapor, and incandescent lamps.  Plants were watered with half-strength Hoagland’s solution.  SA and/or Silwet treatment. Plants with 25 to 30 rosette leaves (rosette diameter 60 to 70 mm) were selected and sprayed with 0.30 mM SA (salicylic acid, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)  in 0.02% Silwet L77 to run-off, and control plants were sprayed with 0.02% Silwet L77, a surfactant (Lehle Seeds, Round Rock, TX, USA), alone. SA and/or Silwet treatment. Plants with 25 to 30 rosette leaves (rosette diameter 60 to 70 mm) were selected and sprayed with 0.30 mM SA (salicylic acid, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)  in 0.02% Silwet L77 to run-off, and control plants were sprayed with 0.02% Silwet L77, a surfactant (Lehle Seeds, Round Rock, TX, USA), alone. 5 - 6 week old vegetative leaves from plants from each combination of accession and treatment were harvested at 4, 28, and 52 hours post-treatment, and quick-frozen in liquid nitrogen for subsequent RNA extractions. Three plants per accession were bulked for each concentration/time point. Each plant was harvested only once. To avoid diurnal variation in gene expression, the time points were 24 hrs apart and harvesting was always performed over a 30 minute period at the same time of day (1:00 PM).	RNA was extracted from the bulked plants using TRIzol as per the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), followed by purification on RNeasy columns (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA).	cDNA and labeled cRNA was prepared according to the manufacturer’s guidelines in the GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual 701021 rev1 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The cDNA synthesis was initiated with 12 micrograms total RNA; biotin labeling was conducted using an ENZO kit.	Title: Fluidics Station Protocol. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix EukGE-WS2v3 Hybridization. Description: 		Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	
Protocol Parameters								
Protocol Hardware								
Protocol Software				MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0		MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact								
Protocol Term Source REF								
SDRF File	E-TABM-51.sdrf.txt							
Term Source Name	EFO	EO						
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://www.gramene.org/plant_ontology/ontology_browse.html#eo						
Term Source Version								
