Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-55835						
MAGE-TAB Version	1.1						
Public Release Date	2014-03-12						
Investigation Title	Global changes in gene expression during sub-zero acclimation of three Arabidopsis thaliana accessions						
Comment[Submitted Name]	Global changes in gene expression during sub-zero acclimation of three Arabidopsis thaliana accessions						
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of three Arabidopsis accessions under acclimation to sub-zero temperature at -3 degree Celsius after cold acclimation						
Experiment Description	During cold acclimation plants increase their freezing tolerance in response to low non-freezing temperatures. This is accompanied by many physiological, biochemical and molecular changes that have been extensively investigated. In addition, many cold acclimated plants become more freezing tolerant during exposure to mild, non-damaging sub-zero temperatures. There is hardly any information available about the molecular basis of this adaptation. However, Arabidopsis thaliana is among the species that acclimate to sub-zero temperatures. This makes it possible to use the molecular and genetic tools available in this species to identify components of sub-zero signal transduction and acclimation. Here, we have used microarrays and a qRT-PCR primer platform covering 1880 genes encoding transcription factors to monitor changes in gene expression in the accessions Columbia-0, Rschew and Tenela during the first three days of sub-zero acclimation at -3°C. The results indicate that gene expression during sub-zero acclimation follows a tighly controlled time-course. Especially AP2/EREBP and WRKY transcription factors may be important regulators of sub-zero acclimation, although the CBF signal transduction pathway seems to be less important during sub-zero than during cold acclimation. Globally, we estimate that approximately 5% of all Arabidopsis genes are regulated during sub-zero acclimation. Particularly photosynthesis-related genes were down-regulated and genes belonging to the functional classes of cell wall biosynthesis, hormone metabolism and RNA regulation of transcription were up-regulated. Collectively, these data provide the first global analysis of gene expression during sub-zero acclimation and allow the identification of candidate genes for forward and reverse genetic studies into the molecular mechanisms of sub-zero acclimation. We used whole genome microarrays to monitor changes in gene expression in the Arabidopsis thaliana accessions Columbia-0, Rschew and Tenela during three days of acclimation to sub-zero temperature at -3°C after cold acclimation Plants from Arabidopsis thaliana accessions Columbia-0, Rschew and Tenela were cold acclimated at 4°C for two weeks. Detached leaves were then sub-zero acclimated at -3°C for 8 h, 1 d or 3 d at -3°C. Leaves of cold acclimated plants and sub-zero acclimated leaves were collected for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix ATH1 microarrays in order to explore temporal transcriptome changes during sub-zero acclimation. For each sample total RNA was isolated from a pool of three leaves from three different plants. The experiment was performed in three idenpendent biological replicates.						
Term Source Name	ArrayExpress	EFO					
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl					
Person Last Name	Pagter	Le	Pagter	Hincha			
Person First Name	Majken	Mai	Majken	Dirk			
Person Mid Initials		Q		K			
Person Email	pagter@mpimp-golm.mpg.de						
Person Affiliation	Max Planck Intitute of Molecular Plant Physiology						
Person Phone	+49 331 567 8254						
Person Address	Max Planck Intitute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Am Mühlenberg 1, Potsdam-Golm, Germany						
Person Roles	submitter						
Protocol Name	P-GSE55835-1	P-GSE55835-5	P-GSE55835-6	P-GSE55835-2	P-GSE55835-3	P-GSE55835-4	P-GSE55835-7
Protocol Description	The raw ATH1 hybridization intensities were imported into the Robin software to perform quality assessment and data normalization and to identify genes, which were differentially expressed between cold acclimated samples and samples subjected to different durations of sub-zero acclimation. Principal components analysis (PCA) indicated that one of the Col-0 replicates sub-zero acclimated for 8 h or 3 d (replicate 3 i both cases) were outliers. Hence, these replicates were excluded from further analysis. Data normalization was performed using the RMA method. Statistical analysis of differential gene expression between cold acclimated and sub-zero acclimated samples was carried out using a linear model-based approach, applying a 0.05 P-values and log2 fold ratio greater than 1 and lower than -1 cut-off. P-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamin-Hochberg correction. Expression estimated for each each probe on each chip after normalization. ID_REF =  VALUE = RMA signal	Biotin-labelled aRNA was synthesised from 1 ug total RNA using the MessageAmp II-Biotin Enhanced Single Round aRNA Amplification Kit (Ambion, Carlsbad, CA, USA)	Hybridization solution was prepared according to Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual. The final cRNA concentration was 60 ng/ul. Hybridization was performed for 16-18 h at 45 C and 60 rpm in a rotating hybridization oven (Hybridization Oven 640, Affymetrix). Washing and staining was performed with a fluidics station (GeneChip Fluidics Station 450, Affymetrix), controlled by GCOS v1.4.	For cold acclimation, plants were transferred to a 4 C growth cabinet at 16-h day length with 90 umol m-2 s-1 for an additional 14 days. For sub-zero acclimation, detached leaves from cold acclimated plants were transferred into glass tubes containing 200 ul of distilled water and placed in a temperature-controlled silicon oil bath at -3 C in darkness. In the absence of active ice nucleation, the leaves stayed supercooled during the entire incubation period. Leaves of cold acclimated plants and leaves sub-zero acclimated for 8h, 1d or 3d were collected for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix ATH1 microarrays.	Seeds from the Arabidopsis thaliana accessions Columbia-0, Rschew and Tenela were sown in soil and grown in the greenhouse at 16-h day length, with light supplementation to reach at least 200 umol m-2 s-1, and a temperature of 20 C during the day, 18 C during the night until 42 days after sowing.	Total RNA was isolated from a pool of three leaves from three different plants for each sample, using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen)	Scanning was performed with the geneChip Scanner 3000 7G (Affymetrix), controlled by GCOS v1.4.
Protocol Type	normalization data transformation protocol	labelling protocol	hybridization protocol	sample treatment protocol	growth protocol	nucleic acid extraction protocol	array scanning protocol
Experimental Factor Name	environmental stress	time	ecotype				
Experimental Factor Type	environmental stress	time	ecotype				
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE55835						
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2014-03-12						
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2014-03-12						
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2014-03-12						
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
Pubmed ID	25311197						
Publication DOI	10.1007/s11103-014-0256-z						
Publication Title	Global changes in gene expression, assayed by microarray hybridization and quantitative RT-PCR, during acclimation of three Arabidopsis thaliana accessions to sub-zero temperatures after cold acclimation						
Publication Author List	Le MQ, Pagter M, Hincha DK						
SDRF File	E-GEOD-55835.sdrf.txt						
