Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis carbohydrate metabolism through the diurnal cycle					
Comment[Submitted Name]	Gene expression and carbohydrate metabolism through the diurnal cycle					
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array				
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO				
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array					
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis over the diurnal cycle					
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4					
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14					
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6174					
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6174					
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 19:41:22 Last Changed Rev: 13058					
Experimental Factor Name	SAMPLING TIME POINT					
Experimental Factor Type	sampling_time_point					
Experimental Factor Term Source REF						
Person Last Name	(NASC)					
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre					
Person Mid Initials						
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info					
Person Phone						
Person Fax						
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom					
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)					
Person Roles	submitter					
Person Roles Term Source REF						
Quality Control Type						
Quality Control Term Source REF						
Replicate Type						
Replicate Term Source REF						
Normalization Type						
Normalization Term Source REF						
Date of Experiment						
Public Release Date	2008-06-14					
PubMed ID						
Publication DOI						
Publication Author List						
Publication Title						
Publication Status						
Publication Status Term Source REF						
Experiment Description	This proposal is aimed at providing transcriptome data to underpin a long-term joint research programme of Steve Smith and Alison Smith. We are jointly studying starch synthesis and breakdown in Arabidopsis leaves, and individually studying other enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism (eg. sucrose synthases, invertases, sugar transporters). Collectively these enzymes are encoded by up to 100 known genes, but there are many others of relevance to our studies. For several years we have employed a defined set of growth conditions for this work (resulting in numerous publications). We have extensive data for changes in the amounts of starch, malto-oligosaccharides and sugars throughout the diurnal cycle in these plants, and we intend to quantitate numerous key enzymes. We now wish to profile changes in transcripts in these plants, so that this information can be correlated with changes in the amounts of key enzymes and metabolites. Analysis of the data sets will help us to relate the synthesis of certain enzymes to particular metabolic functions, and also to help identify genes encoding novel proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism. Current research is aimed at discovering such novel proteins using proteomics approaches (BBSRC Grant: _Discovery and Functional Analysis of the Starch Proteome_). While the growth conditions (12h photoperiod, 150 umol/m2/s, 20C) and ecotype (Col-0) are specifically tailored to our experiments, they will be of value to the wider community, and could form the basis for collaborative studies with other groups. The experiment has involved sampling leaves at eleven different time points as follows: 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 13, 14, 16, 20, and 24 h (where time 0 is the onset of dark and 12 h is the onset of light). The 24 h time point is a repeat of 0 h. This sequence provides relatively more samples immediately after the light-dark transitions, when changes in metabolism are most pronounced. Plants were grown in a controlled environment chamber under defined conditions, and selected for harvest according to a random number generator. Three fully expanded leaves were harvested from each of 20 plants for each sample. Leaves were frozen at -80 C and a portion saved for metabolite and enzyme assays while RNA was isolated from the remainder. The RNA has been purified and is ready to send to Nottingham. Experiment Overall Design: Number of plants pooled:20 Experiment Overall Design: Biological replicates: 2					
Protocol Name	P-G6174-4	P-G6174-1	P-G6174-3	P-G6174-2	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	grow	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	unknown; Parameter location = Growth Room; Parameter Humidity = 75; Parameter Temperature = 20; Parameter Lighting = 12h light 12h dark; Parameter Medium = compost; Parameter Treatment = intercept; Parameter Water = 9am and 4pm; Performer: Steve,,Smith	unknown; Parameter location = Growth Room; Parameter Humidity = 75; Parameter Temperature = 20; Parameter Lighting = 12h light  12h dark; Parameter Medium = compost; Parameter Treatment = intercept; Parameter Water = 9am and 4pm; Performer: Steve,,Smith	Phenol/Choloform Extraction; Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol ; Protocol Type = nucleic_acid_extraction; Performer: Steve,,Smith	Preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA; RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Â&deg;C for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.   ; Protocol Type = labeling; Performers: John,Y,Okyere, Janet,,Higgins	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters						
Protocol Hardware						
Protocol Software					MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact						
Protocol Term Source REF					mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6174.sdrf.txt					
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo	
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version						
