Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis treated with silwet for varying time and high throughout haplotyping and single feature polymorphism markers in Arabidopsis 							
Comment[Submitted Name]	High-density haplotyping with microarray-based expression and single feature polymorphism markers in Arabidopsis							
Experimental Design	time_series_design	compound_treatment_design	strain_or_line_design					
Experimental Design Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology	The MGED Ontology	The MGED Ontology					
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array							
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis treated with surfactant 0.02% Silwet L77 for different amounts of time							
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2007-01-01							
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	5							
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-TABM-61							
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-12 20:18:42 Last Changed Rev: 13058							
Experimental Factor Name	time							
Experimental Factor Type	time							
Experimental Factor Term Source REF								
Person Last Name	West	Michelmore	Doerge	Kliebenstein	St Clair	St. Clair	van Leeuwen	Kozik
Person First Name	Marilyn	Richard	R	Daniel	Dina	Dina	Hans	Alexander
Person Mid Initials	A.L.	W.	W.	J.	A.			
Person Email						dastclair@ucdavis.edu		
Person Affiliation						UC Davis Plant Sciences,		
Person Roles						submitter		
Person Roles Term Source REF								
Quality Control Type	spike_quality_control	biological_replicate						
Quality Control Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology	The MGED Ontology						
Public Release Date	2007-01-01							
PubMed ID	16702412							
Publication DOI	10.1101/gr.5011206							
Publication Author List	Marilyn A.L. West; Hans van Leeuwen; Alexander Kozik; Daniel J. Kliebenstein; R. W. Doerge; Dina A. St.Clair; Richard W. Michelmore							
Publication Title	High-density haplotyping with microarray-based expression and single feature polymorphism markers in Arabidopsis							
Publication Status	published							
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO							
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796							
Experiment Description	The study of natural genetic variation for plant disease resistance responses is a complementary approach to utilizing mutants to elucidate genetic pathways.  While some key genes involved in pathways controlling disease resistance, and signaling intermediates such as salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA), have been identified through mutational analyses, the use of genetic variation in natural populations permits the identification of change-of-function alleles, which likely act in a quantitative manner.  Whole genome microarrays, such as Affymetrix GeneChips, allow for molecular characterization of the disease response at a genomics level and characterization of differences in gene expression due to natural variation.  Differences in the level of gene expression, or expression level polymorphisms (ELPs), can be mapped in a segregating population to identify regulatory quantitative trait loci (expression QTLs, e-QTLs) affecting host resistance responses.  We assessed Arabidopsis accessions Bayreuth-0 (Bay-0) and Shahdara (Sha) for natural variation in the response to SA.  We treated vegetatively grown plants with either SA or a control solution (Silwet), and harvested the plants 4, 28, or 52 hours after chemical treatment.  We present Affymetrix GeneChip microarray expression data for 2 biological replications of the control (Silwet) samples for Bay-0 and Sha.  These GeneChips were used to generate genetic markers which allowed the development of high-density haplotype maps of a Bay-0 x Sha RIL population.							
Protocol Name	P-TABM-hans15	P-TABM-103	P-TABM-hans16					
Protocol Type	growth protocol	nucleic acid extraction protocol	nucleic acid labeling protocol					
Protocol Description	Seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana accessions Bay-0 and Sha were obtained from ABRC through TAIR (www.arabidopsis.org).  Bay-0 and Sha plants grown on three separate dates in a growth chamber under short day conditions (8 h light at 100Ð120 ?Ei, 20¡C day/ 20¡C night) to maintain plants in the vegetative phase. At 6 wk these plants were sprayed to run-off with 0.02% Silwet L77, a surfactant (Lehle Seeds; http://www.arabidopsis.com). All rosette leaves of three plants per genotype-time point combination were bulk harvested 4, 28, or 52 h post-treatment and quick-frozen in liquid nitrogen.	RNA was extracted from the bulked plants using TRIzol as per the manufacturerÂ’s protocol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), followed by purification on RNeasy columns (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA).	cDNA and labeled cRNA were prepared according to the manufacturerÂ’s guidelines in the GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual 701021 rev1 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA).  cDNA synthesis was performed with enzymes purchased from Invitrogen, and biotin labeling was conducted using an ENZO IVT labeling kit as per the GeneChip manufacturer's protocols.					
Protocol Term Source REF	EFO	EFO	EFO					
SDRF File	E-TABM-61.sdrf.txt							
Term Source Name	ArrayExpress	The MGED Ontology	EFO					
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/					
Term Source Version								
