Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis dormant versus active axillary shoot apical mersitems	
Comment[Submitted Name]	Identification of genes differentially expressed in dormant versus active axillary shoot apical mersitems	
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array	
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO	
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4	
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-11	
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE10324	
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-10324	
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-07-29 18:28:05 Last Changed Rev: 13058	
Experimental Factor Name	
Experimental Factor Type	
Experimental Factor Term Source REF	
Person Last Name	(NASC)	
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre	
Person Mid Initials	
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info	
Person Phone	
Person Fax	
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom	
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)	
Person Roles	submitter	
Person Roles Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology	
Quality Control Type	
Quality Control Term Source REF	
Replicate Type	
Replicate Term Source REF	
Normalization Type	
Normalization Term Source REF	
Date of Experiment	
Public Release Date	2008-06-11	
PubMed ID	
Publication DOI	
Publication Author List	
Publication Title	
Publication Status	
Publication Status Term Source REF	
Experiment Description	The aim of this study is to identify genes differentially expressed during the transition between dormancy and activity in axillary shoot apical meristems. We have chosen to study this by comparing mRNA populations from the axillary buds of the auxin over-responding, apically dominant axr3-1 mutant of Arabidopsis,with those from the axillary buds of the auxin resistant axr1-12 bushy mutant. Preliminary investigation using cDNA AFLP has been successful in identifying differentially expressed transcripts in the buds of these two genotypes, thus demonstrating the importance of this study, however this is a time consuming procedure. Axillary buds from axr3-1 are seen to arrest at an early stage when the buds are approximately 2mm long and harvested at this point. Buds of a similar size were harvested from axr1-12 plants and the RNA extracted using Qiagen columns.These two mRNA samples will represent the dormant and active buds to be comparedin this experiment. The plants from which these buds were harvested were grown in adjacent p40 trays in a plant growth room. Between two and three buds were harvested from each plant. Experimenter name: Sally Ward; Experimenter phone: 01904 328683; Experimenter fax: 01904 328682; Experimenter institute: University of York; Experimenter address: Dept of Biology (Area 11),; University of York,; Heslington,; York; Experimenter zip/postal_code: YO10 5DD; Experimenter country: UK Experiment Overall Design: 2 samples were used in this experiment	
Protocol Name	P-10324-2	P-10324-1	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6	
Protocol Type	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	
Protocol Description	Qiagen RNEasy columns: As in manufacturers instructions including DNase treatment	RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3') was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70oC for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour. The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis. 130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM beta-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours. 10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA. The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module. The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix. The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters. The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module. The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA. The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments. 15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	
Protocol Parameters	
Protocol Hardware	
Protocol Software			MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact	
Protocol Term Source REF			mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-10324.sdrf.txt	
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology	mo	
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version							
