Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis of til1-1 mutant plants heat shock response				
Comment[Submitted Name]	Heat shock response of til1-1 mutant plants				
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array			
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO			
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array				
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis mutant for til1 after heat shock treatment				
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE12619				
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2009-09-15				
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3				
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-12619				
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-07-30 05:14:19 Last Changed Rev: 13058				
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE	TEMPERATURE			
Experimental Factor Type	genotype	temperature			
Experimental Factor Term Source REF					
Person Last Name	Charng				
Person First Name	Yee-yung				
Person Mid Initials					
Person Email	yycharng@gate.sinica.edu.tw				
Person Phone					
Person Fax					
Person Address	Yee-yung Charng, Inst. BioAgric. Sci., Academia Sinica, 128, Academia Rd. Sec. 2, Taipei, 11529, Taiwan, R.O.C.				
Person Affiliation	Academia Sinica				
Person Roles	submitter				
Person Roles Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology				
Quality Control Type					
Quality Control Term Source REF					
Replicate Type					
Replicate Term Source REF					
Normalization Type					
Normalization Term Source REF					
Date of Experiment					
Public Release Date	2009-09-15				
PubMed ID	19302169				
Publication DOI	10.1111/j.1365-3040.2009.01972.x				
Publication Author List	Chi WT, Fung RW, Liu HC, Hsu CC, Charng YY				
Publication Title	Temperature-induced lipocalin is required for basal and acquired thermotolerance in Arabidopsis				
Publication Status	published				
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO				
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796				
Experiment Description	Several lipocalin genes from higher plants were shown to be responsive to both high and low temperature stresses and have been named as temperature-induced lipocalin (Til).  In this study, a reverse genetic approach was taken to elucidate the role of Arabidopsis Til1 (At5g58070) in thermotolerance.  We showed that Til1 proteins was constitutively expressed and increased significantly after heat shock treatment.  A T-DNA knockout line of Til1, designated as til1-1, could not produce Til1 and showed severe defects in basal and acquired thermotolerance.  Introducing a wild type copy of Til1 gene into til1-1 complemented the mutant phenotype.  Over-expression of Til1 in the wild type plant did not enhance thermotolerance.  Til1 is peripherally associated with plasma membrane, suggesting a regulatory or protective role of this protein in membrane function.  Transcriptomic analysis showed that the heat shock response in til1-1 was not altered as compared to the wild type plants.  The temperature threshold for heat shock protein induction was not affected by the level of Til1.  Ion leakage analysis revealed no significant difference in membrane stability between the wild type and til1-1 seedlings.  These results suggested that Til1 is not involved in regulating membrane fluidity or stability.  Nevertheless, the level of malondialdehyde was significantly higher in til1-1 than in the wild type after severe heat treatment.  The mutant plants were also more sensitive than the wild type to tert-butyl hydroperoxide, a reagent that induces lipid peroxidation.  Taken together, our data indicate that Til1 is an essential component for thermotolerance probably by acting against lipid peroxidation induced by severe heat stress.  Experiment Overall Design: Total RNA was isolated from the seedlings of 7-d old wild-type and til1-1 mutant seedlings (a pool of about 100 plants per treatment in duplicates) harvested immediately after heat shock treatment. In this experiment, total 8 chips were used, 1 each for 2 biological replicates of the control and HS-treated samples for the wild type and mutant plants.				
Protocol Name	P-G12619-3	P-G12619-1	P-AFFY-6	P-G12619-2	
Protocol Type	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation	
Protocol Description	Qiagen RNA extraction kit	According to standard Affymetrix protocols.	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	GCOS; normalized by global scaling	
Protocol Parameters					
Protocol Hardware					
Protocol Software			MicroArraySuite 5.0		
Protocol Contact					
Protocol Term Source REF				The MGED Ontology	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-12619.sdrf.txt				
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version					
