Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-61484
MAGE-TAB Version	1.1						
Public Release Date	2014-09-18
Investigation Title	Gamma radiation and HZE treatment of seedlings in Arabidopsis						
Comment[Submitted Name]	Gamma radiation and HZE treatment of seedlings in Arabidopsis
Experiment Description	Plants exhibit a robust transcriptional response to gamma radiation which includes the induction of transcripts required for homologous recombination and the suppression of transcripts that promote cell cycle progression. Various DNA damaging agents induce different spectra of DNA damage as well as ‚Äúcollateral‚Äù damage to other cellular components and therefore are not expected to provoke identical responses by the cell. Here we study the effects of two different types of ionizing radiation (IR) treatment, HZE (1 GeV Fe26+ high mass, high charge, and high energy relativistic particles) and gamma photons, on the transcriptome of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. Both types of IR induce small clusters of radicals that can result in the formation of double strand breaks (DSBs), but HZE also produces linear arrays of extremely clustered damage. We performed these experiments across a range of time points (1.5-24 h after irradiation) in both wild-type plants and in mutants defective in the DSB-sensing protein kinase ATM. The two types of IR exhibit a shared double strand break-repair-related damage response, although they differ slightly in the timing, degree, and ATM-dependence of the response. The ATM-dependent, DNA metabolism-related transcripts of the ‚ÄúDSB response‚Äù were also induced by other DNA damaging agents, but were not induced by conventional stresses. Both Gamma and HZE irradiation induced, at 24 h post-irradiation, ATM-dependent transcripts associated with a variety of conventional stresses; these were overrepresented for pathogen response, rather than DNA metabolism. In contrast, only HZE-irradiated plants, at 1.5 h after irradiation, exhibited an additional and very extensive transcriptional response, shared with plants experiencing ‚Äúextended night.‚Äù This response was not apparent in gamma-irradiated plants. We treated 5-day-old WT and atm-1 seedlings of Arabidopsis thaliana with 100 Gy of Gamma radiation (over a span of 15 minutes) or 30 Gy of HZE (over a span of approximately 12 minutes).  Gamma irradiations were completed at 8:40 am, while HZE irradiations were conducted in two runs (due to space limitations) which were completed at 1:09 and 1:28pm respectively.  Gamma treated seedlings were sampled at 10:10 am, 11:40 am, 2:55 pm, 8:40 pm, and 8:40 am.  HZE treated seedlings were sampled at 2:39 pm, 4:09 pm, 7:24 pm, 1:09 am, and 1:09 pm.  Un-irradiated WT and atm-1 control seedlings were sampled at 10:45 am on Day #1 and 9:15 am on Day #2.  There are a total of 22 experimental or control conditions, with two replicates per condition, yielding 44 samples overall.						
Term Source Name	ArrayExpress	EFO
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl					
Person Last Name	Britt	Culligan	Huefner	Missirian	Conklin	Britt	
Person First Name	Anne	Kevin	Neil	Victor	Phillip	Anne	
Person Mid Initials		M	D		A	B	
Person Email	abbritt@ucdavis.edu						
Person Affiliation	UC Davis						
Person Address	Plant Biology, UC Davis, One Shields Drive, Davis, CA, USA						
Person Roles	submitter						
Protocol Name	P-GSE61484-1	P-GSE61484-5	P-GSE61484-6	P-GSE61484-2	P-GSE61484-3	P-GSE61484-4	P-GSE61484-7
Protocol Description	The results were quantified and analyzed using GCOS 1.2 software (Affymetrix Inc.) with default values (scaling, target signal intensity = 500; normalization, all probe sets; parameters, all set at default values).  The data was normalized using RMA from the R package affy.  To generate the matrix of expression values here, normalization was performed simultaneously across all samples.  NOTE: When generating the results reported in the paper itself, normalization was performed separately for each experimental condition/control condition pair, normalizing only across the 4 samples associated with that specific experimental or control condition. ID_REF =  VALUE = log2 RMA signal	Single-stranded and then double-stranded cDNA was synthesized from the poly(A)+ mRNA present in the isolated total RNA (typically 10 Œºg total RNA starting material for each sample reaction) using the SuperScript double-stranded cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and poly(T) nucleotide primers that contained a sequence recognized by T7 RNA polymerase. A portion of the resulting double-stranded cDNA was used as a template to generate biotin-tagged cRNA from the Affymetrix GeneChip IVT labeling kit, and 15 Œºg of the resulting biotin-tagged cRNA was fragmented to an average strand length of 100 bases (range 35‚Äì200 bases) following prescribed protocols (Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual).	Subsequently, 10 Œºg of this fragmented target cRNA was hybridized at 45∞C with rotation for 16 h (Affymetrix GeneChip Hybridization Oven 640) to probe sets present on an Affymetrix ATH1 array. The GeneChip arrays were washed and then stained with SAPE (streptavidin‚Äìphycoerythrin) on an Affymetrix Fluidics Station 450.	For irradiation, plates were moved either to the Controlled Environment Radiation Facility for exposure to gamma radiation (100 Gy at 7 Gy/min), or to the National Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) for exposure to accelerated 1 GeV/n 56Fe particles (30 Gy at 2.5 Gy/min).	Five days prior to irradiation, the plates were placed vertically in a 21∞C growth chamber in the BNL Controlled Environment Facility, where plants grew under cool white lamps (16 h day) until the time of irradiation.	Approximately 30-40 plants were harvested and pooled together for total RNA extraction (RNeasy Mini-Prep; Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Eluted total RNAs were quantified with a portion of the recovered total RNA adjusted to a final concentration of 1.25 Œºg Œºl-1.	Scanning was performed on a GeneChip Scanner 3000.
Protocol Type	normalization data transformation protocol	labelling protocol	hybridization protocol	sample treatment protocol	growth protocol	nucleic acid extraction protocol	array scanning protocol
Experimental Factor Name	TREATED WITH	SAMPLING TIME	TREATMENT DURATION	TIME AFTER TREATMENT	GENOTYPE	AGE	
Experimental Factor Type	treated with	sampling time	treatment duration	time after treatment	genotype	age	
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE61484						
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2014-09-18						
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2014-09-17						
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2014-09-18						
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
SDRF File	E-GEOD-61484.sdrf.txt
