Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis Agrobacterium tumefaciens induced tumour and non-tumour tissue	
Experimental Design	pathogenicity_design	transcription profiling by array	
Experimental Design Term Source REF	mo	EFO	
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]		
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3	
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-NASC-21	
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-10-15 13:53:56 Last Changed Rev: 14677	
Experimental Factor Name	infect	
Experimental Factor Type	infect	
Experimental Factor Term Source REF	
Person Last Name	unknown	Deeken	
Person First Name	unknown	Rosalia	
Person Mid Initials	
Person Email		deeken@botanik.uni-wuerzburg.de	
Person Phone	+44 (0)115 951 3091	+49 931 8886121	
Person Fax	+44 (0)115 951 3297	+49 931 8886158	
Person Address	Plant Science Division, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonnington Campus, Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK	Julius-von-Sachs-Platz 2 Wuerzburg D-97082 Germany 	
Person Affiliation		Group Prof. Dr. Rainer Hedrich	
Person Roles		submitter;biosource_provider;investigator	
Person Roles Term Source REF		mo	
Quality Control Type	
Quality Control Term Source REF	
Replicate Type	
Replicate Term Source REF	
Normalization Type	
Normalization Term Source REF	
Date of Experiment	
Public Release Date	
PubMed ID	
Publication DOI	
Publication Author List	
Publication Title	
Publication Status	
Publication Status Term Source REF	
Experiment Description	Agrobacterium tumefaciens, a bacterial species found in temperate soils world wide, is the causative agent of crown gall disease on many plants. A. tumefaciens-induced tumours are feared in orchards and vineyards because of their pathological interference with nutrient and water supply which results in crop decline. Small wounds at the crown of the plant, usually induced by wind-bending, are potential entry sites for the bacterium. The tumorous growth is initiated by the integration and expression of the T-DNA of the bacterial Ti plasmid within the plant nuclear DNA. The T-DNA encodes enzymes catalysing the synthesis of increased concentrations of auxin and cytokinin, and of opines which stimulate cell division and enlargement. The fast growing tumours have been shown to be a strong nutrient sink on their host plants. As a matter of fact, sugar and K+ content were found to be up to 10- and 5-fold, respectively, higher in this tissue and transpiration was about 15 times increased compared to normal tissue. Whereas the morphological structure as well as some physiological and biochemical parameters of the tumour have been analysed in detail, little is known about the underlying gene expression pattern. Proliferation and growth of the tumour induced by Agrobacterium tumefaciens is obviously due to the extraordinary high concentration of phytohormons, minerals and metabolites. Their influence on regulation of gene transcription will provide information on the mechanisms underlying fast tumour growth. In a project funded by the DFG we recently started to investigate the role of solute transporter for tumour development on the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. By comparing the expression pattern of RNA preparations from Arabidopsis tumour and non-tumour tissue, we will be able to identify genes which facilitate crown gall development. For the expression analysis with an Affymetrix full genome chip we will induce tumours at the base of an injured Arabidopsis inflorescence stalk (var. Wassilewskija, WS-2). RNA will be extraxted from tumour and injured non-tumor inflorescence stalk tissue using the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen), followed by a DNase treatment to eliminate DNA contamination.	
Protocol Name	NASCGrowProt:212	NASCGrowProt:231	NASCSampleTreatmentProt:213	NASCGrowProt:232	NASCExtractProtocol:1	NASCLabelProtocol:1	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-EukGE-WS2v4	Affymetrix:Protocol:Percentile	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat	
Protocol Type					nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation	
Protocol Description			Inflorescence stalk injured at the base with a injection needle 		Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol 	RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70°C for 10 minutes.  First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ß-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.	Title: Fluidics Station Protocol. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL Analysis (Percentile). Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 	
Protocol Parameters	Temperature;Atmosphere;Humidity;Light;Medium;	Temperature;Medium;Light;Humidity;Atmosphere;		Medium;Temperature;Humidity;Light;Atmosphere;	
Protocol Hardware	
Protocol Software							MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact	
Protocol Term Source REF									The MGED Ontology	
SDRF File	E-NASC-21.sdrf.txt	
Term Source Name	ncbitax		nasc	ArrayExpress	mo	EFO	The MGED Ontology	
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/taxonomyhome.html		http://arabidopsis.info/catalogue.html	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version								

