Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis exposed to aphid feeding to examine the molecular basis of plant insect interactions.						
Comment[Submitted Name]	The molecular basis of plant insect interactions.						
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array					
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO					
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis exposed to aphid feeding						
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4						
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6172						
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6172						
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 19:16:54 Last Changed Rev: 13058						
Experimental Factor Name	biotic plant treatment						
Experimental Factor Type	biotic plant treatment						
Experimental Factor Term Source REF							
Person Last Name	(NASC)						
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre						
Person Mid Initials							
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info						
Person Phone							
Person Fax							
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom						
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)						
Person Roles	submitter						
Person Roles Term Source REF							
Quality Control Type							
Quality Control Term Source REF							
Replicate Type							
Replicate Term Source REF							
Normalization Type							
Normalization Term Source REF							
Date of Experiment							
Public Release Date	2008-06-14						
PubMed ID							
Publication DOI							
Publication Author List							
Publication Title							
Publication Status							
Publication Status Term Source REF							
Experiment Description	The aim of this study is to identify Arabidopsis genes whose expression is altered by aphid feeding. An understanding of the plant aphid interaction at the level of the plant transcriptome will 1) consolidate current areas of investigation focused on the phloem composition (the aphid diet), 2) open up areas of plant aphid interactions for ourselves and other workers, 3) Contribute to understanding the use of new molecular technologies in an environmental context and  4) contribute to existing and development of novel control strategies.Our Arabidopsis/Myzus persicae system provides a valuable model for the study because of: a) the advantages of using Arabidopsis, b) The ability to use clonal insects, c) phloem feeding aphids facilitate focus on a specific cell type, d) aphid stylectomy allows collection of pure phloem sap to monitor ˜phloem phenotype€™ of the plant and the insect diet, e) we have techniques to monitor the reproductive performance and feeding behaviour aphids.Our strategy has been to test the function of selected genes, particularly those regulating phloem composition (the feeding site of the aphid) based on current phloem models of phloem function. Gene choice is limited the simplicity of current models of phloem aphid interaction.We propose a simple two treatment (aphid infested vs control plants) experiment that will identify novel target genes for future analysis. Arabidopsis plants (variety Columbia) will be grown in 16/8 light/dark in temperature controlled growth rooms. At growth stage 3.90, when rosette growth is complete, 10 clonal adult Myzus persicae will be caged in clip cages on the two largest leaves on each plant. Control plants will be treated identically except that the cages will be empty. Leaves will be harvested 8 h after infestation. This time point is selected as we know that 90% of aphids are plugged into the sieve element within 2h and that a 6h lag phase has period has previously been used when examining gene expression affected by wounding. In subsequent experiments we will examine time courses of expression of relevant genes using other approaches. Pooling two leaves from each of ten plants will generate the RNA sample, ensuring that expression signals are representative of the population of plants. Experiment Overall Design: Number of plants pooled:10						
Protocol Name	P-G6172-2	P-G6172-5	P-G6172-1	P-G6172-4	P-G6172-3	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	Aphid cages attached to leaves- no aphids ; Performer: Jeremy,,Pritchard	10 aphids caged on 2 rosette leaves for 8 hours ; Performer: Jeremy,,Pritchard	unknown; Parameter location = Growth Room; Parameter Humidity = 70%; Parameter Temperature = 22oC; Parameter Lighting = 18 hour days; Parameter Medium = compost; Parameter Nutrients = osmocote slow release fertiliser mixed in compost; Parameter Water = 3 x per week; Performer: Jeremy,,Pritchard	Qiagen / Trizol; Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol ; Protocol Type = nucleic_acid_extraction; Performer: Jeremy,,Pritchard	Preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA; RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Â&deg;C for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.   ; Protocol Type = labeling; Performers: John,Y,Okyere, Janet,,Higgins	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters							
Protocol Hardware							
Protocol Software						MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact							
Protocol Term Source REF						mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6172.sdrf.txt						
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo	
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version							
