Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-16765							
Public Release Date	2011-08-15							
Investigation Title	Transcriptomic and phenotypic variation for salt stress response in Arabidopsis							
Comment[Submitted Name]	Transcriptomic and phenotypic variation for salt stress response in Arabidopsis							
Experiment Description	Transcriptional variation, also called expression level polymorphism (ELP), contributes to intra-specific phenotypic variation in many organisms. Differentially expressed transcripts are typically enriched for stress-related genes, suggesting that differences in response to the environment are a particularly common point of divergence among gentoypes. Analysis of ELPs also has been suggested as a way to assess unintended consequences of transgene introduction; however, it is important that interpretation of transcriptional changes be performed within the context of potential fitness effects.  In these studies we sought to examine differential gene expression in response to salinity for two widely used Arabidopsis thaliana ecotypes, Wassilewskija (Ws) and Columbia (Col), and a single gene mutation (glabrous, gl1-1) in the Col background (Col(gl)), in relation to genetic, phenotypic, and fitness differences. Growth analyses were performed with seedlings germinated on culture media and growth chamber-grown plants carried through the full life cycle. Transcriptome analyses were performed with salt treated and control growth-chamber grown plants six days post initiation of salt stress. Ws plants had the least salt injury and highest dry matter accumulation and seed production in salt stressed conditions. ELPs among genoytypes and in response to 100 mM NaCl were enriched for genes associated with response to stress, including stress-associated transcription factors, heat shock and redox metabolism genes, and R genes. Application of salt resulted in many more transcripts up- or down-regulated in Col and Ws than in Col(gl).  Many of the transcripts influenced by salt in Col were already altered in gl1-1 plants in the absence of salt, although Col(gl) plants did not show any detectable signs of stress, or effects on fecundity in the absence of salt treatment.  The majority of salt-induced transcriptional changes that occurred in Ws also occurred in Col, suggesting common salt stress responses in these two ecotypes. Many more genes were affected by salt in Col than Ws, however, possibly reflecting the greater salt injury observed for Col. There was minimal overlap between the transcripts that differed for Ws and Col prior to salt treatment and those that were subsequently affected by salt stress.  Thus, many genes conferring comparative salt stress tolerance in Ws likely differ from those whose expression levels are modified in response to salt stress. These studies demonstrate transcriptional variation among Arabidopsis genotypes in response to salt stress.  Greater transcriptome differences did not necessarily correspond with greater genetic difference or phenotypic differences in morphology, fecundity, and resistance to salt stress.  These results suggest that depending on circumstance, transcriptional changes can reflect response to injury, facilitate adaptive expression of fitness-associated traits, or allow for phenotypic buffering to minimize the impact of genetic changes. Three Arabidopsis genotypes were grown in the growth chamber in the absence and presence of salt stress. Plants from 20 days after sowing (6 days after salt treatment) were used for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. There were two biological replicates for each genotype and salt treatment combination.							
Date of Experiment								
Term Source Name	EFO							
Term Source Version								
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl							
Person Last Name	Chan	Chan	Loescher	Grumet				
Person First Name	Zhulong	Zhulong	Wayne	Rebecca				
Person Mid Initials								
Person Email	chanzhul@msu.edu							
Person Affiliation	Michigan State University							
Person Phone								
Person Fax								
Person Address	Michigan State University, Plant and Soil Sciences Bldg, Lansing, MI, USA							
Person Roles	submitter							
Person Roles Term Source REF								
Person Roles Term Accession Number								
Normalization Type								
Normalization Term Accession Number								
Normalization Term Source REF								
Replicate Type								
Replicate Term Accession Number								
Replicate Term Source REF								
Experimental Design								
Experimental Design Term Accession Number								
Experimental Design Term Source REF								
Quality Control Type								
Quality Control Term Accession Number								
Quality Control Term Source REF								
Protocol Name	P-GSE16765-1	P-GSE16765-6	P-GSE16765-3	P-GSE16765-8	P-GSE16765-7	P-GSE16765-2	P-GSE16765-4	P-GSE16765-5
Protocol Description	ID_REF = <br>VALUE = RMA-calculated log2 intensity	standard Affymetrix procedures	Seeds were sown directly on soil in 26  × 26  × 6 cm flat pot filled with standard  planting medium (Baccto, Houston, TX, USA). Each flat pot was divided into 36 subsections and 5 seeds were pipetted onto wet soil surface carefully in each subsection.  The pots were covered with a transparent plastic cover and plants were grown at 23/18 °C in the growth chamber with a 10h light/14h dark cycle at 350 μmol m-2s-1 and 70% relative humidity. Half Strength Hoagland Solution was applied and watered from below once per week before the beginning of the salt treatment. At 14 DAS, the flats were thinned to 1 seedling per subsection.	All the Affymetrix data files produced with Affymetrix GCOS software (*.CEL files) were analyzed using Bioconductor, a public source software for the analyses of genomic data rooted in the statistical computing environment R. The data were normalized by robust multioiarray normalization of probe-level data with RMA and analyzed using affylmGUI running on R software.	standard Affymetrix procedures	Plants subjected to salt stress were watered with NaCl solution which was dissolved in ½ Strength Hoagland Solution. Salt treatment started at 14 DAS . Plants were watered from below to field capacity and then sprayed with the same concentration of NaCl solution from the top, ensuring adequate leaching and preventing excess salinity. The concentrations of NaCl supplementation were increased stepwise by 50 mM every 2 days for each line, to the indicated maximum (0, 100 mM). Plants were then watered every 2 days with or without NaCl at the indicated concentrations. The flats were rotated in the growth chamber everyday to minimize the effect of growth condition.	Total RNA was extracted and purified using QIAGEN-RNeasy Mini Kit according to guidelines specified by the manufacturer.	Ten µg of total RNA was processed to produce biotinylated cRNA targets.
Protocol Software								
Protocol Hardware								
Protocol Contact								
Protocol Type	bioassay_data_transformation	hybridization	grow	feature_extraction	image_aquisition	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling
Protocol Term Source REF								
Protocol Term Accession Number								
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE	COMPOUND						
Experimental Factor Type	genotype	compound						
Experimental Factor Term Source REF								
Experimental Factor Term Accession Number								
Publication Title	Global gene expression analysis of transgenic, mannitol-producing, and salt-tolerant Arabidopsis thaliana indicates widespread changes in abiotic and biotic stress-related genes.							
Publication Author List	Chan Z, Grumet R, Loescher W							
PubMed ID	21821598							
Publication DOI	10.1093/jxb/err130							
Publication Status	published							
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO							
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796							
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE16765							
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2011-08-15							
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis Columbia and Wassilewskija ecotypes and gl1-1 after salt stress treatment							
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array							
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2011-08-14							
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2009-06-22							
SDRF File	E-GEOD-16765.sdrf.txt							
