Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis roots - nutritional control of plant development: molecular analysis of the NO3- response pathway								
Comment[Submitted Name]	Nutritional control of plant development: molecular analysis of the NO3- response pathway in Arabidopsis roots.								
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array							
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO							
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array								
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis overexpressing ANR1 after treatment with dexamethasone								
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14								
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6155								
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4								
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6155								
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 19:09:53 Last Changed Rev: 13058								
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE	COMPOUND							
Experimental Factor Type	genotype	compound							
Experimental Factor Term Source REF									
Person Last Name	(NASC)								
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre								
Person Mid Initials									
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info								
Person Phone									
Person Fax									
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom								
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)								
Person Roles	submitter								
Person Roles Term Source REF									
Quality Control Type									
Quality Control Term Source REF									
Replicate Type									
Replicate Term Source REF									
Normalization Type									
Normalization Term Source REF									
Date of Experiment									
Public Release Date	2008-06-14								
PubMed ID									
Publication DOI									
Publication Author List									
Publication Title									
Publication Status									
Publication Status Term Source REF									
Experiment Description	Background: The Arabidopsis ANR1 gene is a key regulator of root architecture (Zhang and Forde, 1998): when ANR1 is down-regulated (by antisense or co-suppression) the resulting lines are no longer able to proliferate their lateral roots in response to localised supplies of NO3- (Zhang and Forde, 1998). ANR1 encodes a root-specific member of the MADS box family of transcription factors and is thought to be a component of a signalling pathway that links an external NO3- signal to increased meristematic activity in the lateral root meristem (Zhang et al., 1999).A major goal of our present BBSRC-funded project is to learn more about this NO3- response pathway by identifying the downstream targets of ANR1. To this end we have generated a set of transgenic lines in which ANR1 is under a novel post-translational control. This was achieved by tagging ANR1 with the steroid-binding domain of the rat glucocorticoid receptor (rGR) and expressing the fusion protein under the control of the CaMV 35S promoter. Initial results with these lines confirm that the architecture of the root system is altered in a way that correlates with the presence of the steroid inducer (dexamethasone, or DEX) and the expression of the ANR1::rGR transgene.  We now wish to apply transcript analysis to one of these lines (ANGR4-12) to identify the genes whose expression is up- or down-regulated by ANR1. Sablowski and Meyerowitz (1998) successfully used an analogous approach to identify a gene that is an immediate target of the AP3 MADS-box transcription factor (although here, in the absence of microarray technology, differential display was used). Experimental: Plants of the two genotypes (ANGR4-12 and wild type) will be grown in sterile liquid culture for 3-4 weeks and then starved of N for 3 d (to quench the endogenous NO3- signalling pathway) before starting the DEX treatment. Roots will be harvested after 60 min from roots of DEX-treated and mock-treated RGR4-12 and control plants (four RNA samples). To minimise background noise due to environmental variables we will repeat the experiment three times and pool the RNA samples. Experiment Overall Design: Number of plants pooled:20 Experiment Overall Design: Biological replicates: 2								
Protocol Name	P-G6155-5	P-G6155-6	P-G6155-7	P-G6155-2	P-G6155-1	P-G6155-4	P-G6155-3	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	Plants have been N-starved for 2 days. Plants have been transferred after 9 days on MS Agar plate containing 1uM dexamethasone for 1 hour. ; Performer: Sophie,,Filleur	Plants have been N-starved for 2 days.Plants have been transferred after 9 days on MS Agar plate containing no dexamethasone for 1 hour. ; Performer: Sophie,,Filleur	Plants have been N-starved for 2 days.Plants have been transferred after 9 days on MS Agar plate containing 1uM dexamethasone for 1 hour. ; Performer: Sophie,,Filleur	Plants have been N-starved for 2 days. Plants have been transferred after 9 days on MS Agar plate containing no dexamethasone for 1 hour. ; Performer: Sophie,,Filleur	unknown; Parameter Location = Growth room; Parameter Light = 24 hour; Parameter Light brigtht = 140 umolm-2s-1; Parameter Medium = holgand medium; Parameter Temperature = 25 C; Parameter humidity = 55 to 75%; Parameter Nutrients = 0.5% Sucrose; Performer: Sophie,,Filleur	Qiagen / Trizol; Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol ; Protocol Type = nucleic_acid_extraction; Performer: Sophie,,Filleur	Preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA; RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Â&deg;C for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.   ; Protocol Type = labeling; Performers: John,Y,Okyere, Janet,,Higgins	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters									
Protocol Hardware									
Protocol Software								MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact									
Protocol Term Source REF								mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6155.sdrf.txt								
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo			
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php			
Term Source Version									
