Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis Pwer::GFP protoplasts with over-expressed dominant negative mutant isoforms of Aux/IAA transcription factors					
Comment[Submitted Name]	"Positive fluorescent selection permits precise, rapid and in-depth over-expression analysis in plant protoplasts"					
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array				
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO				
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array					
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis overexpressing IAA7mll or IAA19mll after treatment with indole-3-acetic acid					
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3					
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE13783					
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2009-03-07					
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-13783					
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-07-30 13:01:19 Last Changed Rev: 13058					
Experimental Factor Name	genotype	compound				
Experimental Factor Type	genotype	compound				
Experimental Factor Term Source REF						
Person Last Name	Birnbaum					
Person First Name	Kenneth David					
Person Mid Initials						
Person Email	ken.birnbaum@nyu.edu					
Person Phone						
Person Fax						
Person Address	"Birnbaum, Biology, New York University, 1009 Silver Building, 100 Washington Square East, New York, 10003, USA"					
Person Affiliation	New York University					
Person Roles	submitter					
Person Roles Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology					
Public Release Date	2009-03-07					
PubMed ID	19168642					
Publication DOI	10.1104/pp.108.133975					
Publication Author List	"Bargmann BO, Birnbaum KD."					
Publication Title	"Positive fluorescent selection permits precise, rapid, and in-depth overexpression analysis in plant protoplasts"					
Publication Status	published					
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO					
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796					
Experiment Description	"Transient genetic modification of plant protoplasts is a straightforward and rapid technique for the analysis of numerous aspects of plant biology. One drawback in the analysis of transformed protoplast suspensions is that they are a heterogeneous mix of cells that have and have not been successfully transfected. To overcome this problem, we have developed a system that employs a fluorescent positive selection marker in combination with flow cytometric analysis as well as fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) to isolate responses in the transfected protoplasts exclusively. This recombinase-compatible system enables high-throughput screening of genetic circuitry. Moreover, the use of FACS allows in depth downstream analysis. Lastly, over-expression is an effective means to dissect regulatory networks, especially where redundancy exists. Here, this system has been applied to the study of auxin signaling in order to investigate reporter gene activation and genome-wide transcriptional changes in response to manipulation of the auxin-response network. We have transiently over-expressed dominant negative mutant isoforms of Aux/IAA transcription factors (IAA7mII and IAA19mII; Tiwari et al., 2001) in Arabidopsis Pwer::GFP root protoplasts, making use of a RFP fluorescent positive selection marker and FACS to isolate the dually labeled (IAAnmII expressing and Pwer::GFP-positive) cells. We have compared the transcriptional differences between an empty vector control, IAA7mII and IAA19mII protoplasts that had either been treated with 5microM IAA or mock-treated for 3 hours. Experiment Overall Design: 18 samples with 3 replicates for each condition and transformation vector: 3x empty vector mock treated, 3x empty vector IAA treated, 3x IAA7mII over-expressor mock treated, 3x IAA7mII over-expressor IAA treated, 3x IAA19mII over-expressor mock treated and 3x IAA19mII over-expressor IAA treated."					
Protocol Name	P-G13783-2	P-G13783-1	P-G13783-4	P-G13783-3	P-AFFY-6	
Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	feature_extraction	
Protocol Description	"The roots of the seedlings were harvested with a scalpel and incubated in protoplasting solution for 3 h. Protoplasts were filtered and PEG-transformed with an empty vector (pMON999_mRFP), an IAA7mII over-expressor (pBeaconRFP_IAA7mII) or an IAA19mII over-expressor (pBeaconRFP_IAA19mII). Protoplasts were left overnight and treated for 3 h with 5microM IAA or solvent alone. Dually labeled protoplasts were sorted directly into RNA extraction buffer by FACS."	"Pwer::GFP plants were grown in vertically placed square 10x10 cm petri dishes for 7 days in long day (18hr light/6hr dark) 22C conditions in a Percival (Percival Scientific). Plants were grown on MS agar (0.5x MS, 1% sucrose, 1% agar, pH 5.7 with KOH) on top of a nylon mesh."	"Protoplasts were sorted into 350 microliters RLT exrtraction buffer from a QIAGEN Rneasy micro kit and RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer's instructions, including a DNase treatment."	"cDNA was produced, amplified, fragmented and labeled using NuGEN WT-Ovation Pico RNA Amplification System and FL-Ovation cDNA Biotin Module V2."	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	
Protocol Software					MicroArraySuite 5.0	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-13783.sdrf.txt					
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version						