Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis wild-type and gpa1 mutant in response to ABA					
Comment[Submitted Name]	Comparative transcriptome analysis between wild-type and gpa1 mutant in response to ABA					
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array				
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO				
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array					
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis mutant for gpa1 after treatment with abscisic acid					
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14					
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6171					
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4					
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6171					
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 19:13:49 Last Changed Rev: 13058					
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE	COMPOUND				
Experimental Factor Type	genotype	compound				
Experimental Factor Term Source REF						
Person Last Name	(NASC)					
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre					
Person Mid Initials						
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info					
Person Phone						
Person Fax						
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom					
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)					
Person Roles	submitter					
Person Roles Term Source REF						
Quality Control Type						
Quality Control Term Source REF						
Replicate Type						
Replicate Term Source REF						
Normalization Type						
Normalization Term Source REF						
Date of Experiment						
Public Release Date	2008-06-14					
PubMed ID						
Publication DOI						
Publication Author List						
Publication Title						
Publication Status						
Publication Status Term Source REF						
Experiment Description	Mutations in the heterotrimeric G-protein a-subunit of Arabidopsis, GPA1, leads to deficiency in ABA-induced stomatal closure (Wang et al., 2001). To further investigate whether GPA1 is involved in the regulation of gene expression in response to ABA, we examined the induction of known ABA-inducible genes in the gpa1 mutant and compared it to wild-type. We found significant differences in levels of ABA-induced expression between wild-type and gpa1 mutant. In order to systematically investigate GPA1 involvement in ABA signalling leading to gene expression, we are requesting the transcriptome analysis of the gpa1 mutant in response to ABA.In detail, 2 week old wild-type and gpa1 plants grown in the 16/8 hrs light and dark cycle will be treated with either ABA or with a control solution for 3 hours.  10 plants will be used per sample to produce RNA, to give 4 samples, one for each chip: gpa1-1 mutant in the presence (chip1) or absence of ABA (chip2) and wild-type (WS2) in the presence (chip3) or absence of ABA (chip4). Experiment Overall Design: Number of plants pooled:10 plants					
Protocol Name	P-G6171-1	P-G6171-2	P-G6171-4	P-G6171-3	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	grow	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	unknown; Parameter location = Growth Room; Parameter Atmosphere = Normal; Parameter Humidity = N/A; Parameter Temperature = 21 0C; Parameter Lighting = 16 L/8 D; Parameter Medium = Murashige and Skoog with vitamins in agar; Parameter Water = N/A; Performer: Haruko,,Okamoto	Treated with 100 micro M ABA for 3 hours. ; Performer: Haruko,,Okamoto	Qiagen / Trizol; Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol ; Protocol Type = nucleic_acid_extraction; Performer: Haruko,,Okamoto	Preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA; RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Â&deg;C for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.   ; Protocol Type = labeling; Performers: John,Y,Okyere, Janet,,Higgins	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters						
Protocol Hardware						
Protocol Software					MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact						
Protocol Term Source REF					mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6171.sdrf.txt					
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version						
