Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of A. halleri and A.petrea exposed to low and high Zinc	
Comment[Submitted Name]	Newbury: Molecular bases of zinc tolerance and accumulation by Arabidopsis halleri	
Experimental Design	compound_treatment_design	organism_part_comparison_design	species_design	stimulus_or_stress_design	transcription profiling by array	
Experimental Design Term Source REF	mo	mo	mo	mo	EFO	
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]		
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4	
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-NASC-44	
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-10-15 15:02:51 Last Changed Rev: 14677	
Experimental Factor Name	
Experimental Factor Type	
Experimental Factor Term Source REF	
Person Last Name	unknown	Newbury	
Person First Name	unknown	H. John	
Person Mid Initials	
Person Email		h.j.newbury@bham.ac.uk	
Person Phone	+44 (0)115 951 3091	0121 414 5581	
Person Fax	+44 (0)115 951 3297	0121 414 5925	
Person Address	Plant Science Division, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonnington Campus, Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK	School of Biosciences University of Birmingham Edgbaston Birmingham  B15 2TT UK 	
Person Affiliation		University of Birmingham	
Person Roles		biosource_provider;investigator;submitter	
Person Roles Term Source REF		mo	
Quality Control Type	
Quality Control Term Source REF	
Replicate Type	
Replicate Term Source REF	
Normalization Type	
Normalization Term Source REF	
Date of Experiment	
Public Release Date	
PubMed ID	
Publication DOI	
Publication Author List	
Publication Title	
Publication Status	
Publication Status Term Source REF	
Experiment Description	This application is from a NERC-funded consortium (Mark MacNair, Nick Smirnoff, Exeter) and (Brian Ford-Lloyd, John Newbury, Birmingham). Metal tolerance is one of the classic examples of micro-evolution. Despite extensive research the physiological bases of the adaptation in plants are largely unknown. Arabidopsis halleri is a zinc tolerant, zinc accumulating species whereas Arabidopsis petraea is non-accumulating and non-tolerant.  The objective of our programme is to identify:  a) those key genes that act to determine Zn tolerance and accumulation in Arabidopsis (and which account for the difference in performance of A. halleri and A. petraea grown in the presence of elevated Zn), and  b) those _downstream_ genes that are expressed as part of the tolerance or accumulation response. Phase 1: Total of 24 chips: Material ready by May 2003. The results will:  a) tell us how effectively material derived from other Arabidopsis species hybridises to the chips, and  b) identify genes that are differentially expressed in the two species in the presence and absence of Zn stress (thus providing initial lists of genes that may be responsible for Zn tolerance or accumulation- (but see phase 2). A. halleri exposed to low and high Zn; root and leaf mRNAs extracted: 3 replicates of each: = 12 slides. A. petraea exposed to low and high Zn; root and leaf mRNAs extracted: 3 replicates of each: = 12 slides. Phase 2: Total of 48 chips: Material ready by September 2003. The results will tell us which genes, identified as having appropriate expression patterns, co-segregate with the Zn tolerance or accumulation phenotype and will provide firmer candidate genes for intensive study. Bulks will be produced from F3 progeny (from the halleri x petraea cross) following phentoypic analyses for Zn tolerance and accumulation. A bulk of F3 progeny all exhibiting high Zn tolerance: exposed to low and high Zn; leaf and root mRNAs: 3 replicates: = 12 slides. A bulk of F3 progeny all exhibiting low Zn tolerance: exposed to low and high Zn; leaf and root mRNAs: 3 replicates: = 12 slides. A bulk of F3 progeny all exhibiting high Zn accumulation: exposed to low and high Zn; leaf and root mRNAs: 3 replicates: = 12 slides. A bulk of F3 progeny all exhibiting low Zn accumulation: exposed to low and high Zn; leaf and root mRNAs: 3 replicates: = 12 slides.	
Protocol Name	NASCGrowProt:520	NASCSampleTreatmentProt:523	NASCGrowProt:519	NASCGrowProt:518	NASCExtractProtocol:3	NASCLabelProtocol:1	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-EukGE-WS2v4	Affymetrix:Protocol:Percentile	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat	
Protocol Type					nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation	
Protocol Description	Plants were grown in growth rooms at a temperature of 25C and 80% humidity. The photoperiod was 10 hr and the watering regime was weekly. The growth medium was a full mineral medium. The vegetative phases of A. halleri and A. petraea are longer than that of A. thaliana, so that direct comparisons are not straightforward. However, the plants were grown to approximately Boyes key stage 1.13. The leaves was harvested and used for RNA extraction. There were 10 individual plants pooled per treatment.	Plants were transferred to a growth medium containing 25um Zinc, and then further grown to growth stage (Boyes key stage) 1.13. Leaves were harvested and used for RNA extraction. There were 10 individual plants pooled per treatment.	Plants were grown in growth rooms at a temperature of 25C and 80% humidity. The photoperiod was 10 hr and the watering regime was weekly. The growth medium was a full mineral medium. The vegetative phases of A. halleri and A. petraea are longer than that of A. thaliana, so that direct comparisons are not straightforward. However, the plants were grown to approximately Boyes key stage 1.13. The whole root system was harvested and used for RNA extraction. There were 10 individual plants pooled per treatment.	Plants were grown in growth rooms at a temperature of 25C and 80% humidity. The photoperiod was 10 hr and the watering regime was weekly. The growth medium was a full mineral medium. The vegetative phases of A. halleri and A. petraea are longer than that of A. thaliana, so that direct comparisons are not straightforward. However, the plants were grown to approximately Boyes key stage 1.05.	Protocol: Seedlings harvested and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and RNA extracted as described in the Qiagen RNAeasy kit. 	RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70°C for 10 minutes.  First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ß-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.	Title: Fluidics Station Protocol. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL Analysis (Percentile). Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 	
Protocol Parameters	Water;Lighting;Medium;Humidity;Temperature;location;		Water;Lighting;Medium;Humidity;Temperature;location;	Medium;Water;Lighting;Temperature;Humidity;location;	
Protocol Hardware	
Protocol Software							MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact	
Protocol Term Source REF									The MGED Ontology	
SDRF File	E-NASC-44.sdrf.txt	
Term Source Name	mo		ArrayExpress	mo	EFO	The MGED Ontology	
Term Source File	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php		http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version							
