Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis wild type and ein2-5 seedlings to investigate ethylene and auxin interactions in the root					
Comment[Submitted Name]	Ethylene and auxin interactions in the roots of Arabidopsis seedlings					
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array				
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO				
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array					
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis mutant for ein2 or aux1 after treatment with ethylene or indole-3-acetic acid					
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4					
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-15					
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE7432					
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-7432					
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-07 18:51:43 Last Changed Rev: 13058					
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE	COMPOUND				
Experimental Factor Type	genotype	compound				
Experimental Factor Term Source REF						
Person Last Name	Alonso					
Person First Name	Jose					
Person Mid Initials	M.					
Person Email	jmalonso@unity.ncsu.edu					
Person Phone						
Person Fax						
Person Address	Genetics,North Carolina State University, ,Raleigh,27695,USA					
Person Affiliation	North Carolina State University					
Person Roles	submitter					
Person Roles Term Source REF						
Quality Control Type						
Quality Control Term Source REF						
Replicate Type						
Replicate Term Source REF						
Normalization Type						
Normalization Term Source REF						
Date of Experiment						
Public Release Date	2008-06-15					
PubMed ID	17630276					
Publication DOI	10.1105/tpc.107.052068 					
Publication Author List	Anna N Stepanova, Jeonga Yun, Alla V Likhacheva, Jose M Alonso					
Publication Title	Multilevel interactions between ethylene and auxin in Arabidopsis roots.					
Publication Status	published					
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO					
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796					
Experiment Description	Understanding how developmental and environmental signals are integrated to produce specific responses is one of the main challenges of modern biology. Hormones and, most importantly, interactions between different hormones serve as crucial regulators of plant growth and development, playing central roles in the coordination of internal developmental processes with the environment. Herein, a combination of physiological, genetic, cellular, and whole-genome expression profiling approaches has been employed to investigate the mechanisms of interaction between two key plant hormones, ethylene and auxin.  Quantification of the morphological effects of ethylene and auxin in a variety of mutant backgrounds indicates that auxin biosynthesis, transport, signaling and response are required for the ethylene-induced growth inhibition in roots but not in hypocotyls. Analysis of the activation of early auxin and ethylene responses at cellular level, as well as of global changes in gene expression in the wild type versus auxin and ethylene mutants, suggests a simple mechanistic model for the interaction between these two hormones in roots. This model not only implies existence of several levels of interaction but also provides a likely explanation for the strong ethylene response defects observed in auxin mutants.  Experiment Overall Design: The effect of ethylene on gene expression in Col-0 (wild-type) and aux1-7 (an auxin resistant mutant) seedlings' roots was investigated. Hydrocarbon-free air was used as control for the ethylene treatment. Two biological replicates were examined. Experiment Overall Design: Similarly, the effect of auxin (IAA) on gene expression in Col (wild-type) and ein2-5 (an ethylene insensitive mutant) seedlings' roots was studied. Two biological replicates were employed.					
Protocol Name	P-G7432-2	P-G7432-1	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6		
Protocol Type	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction		
Protocol Description	Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogene Life Technologies) and then further purified using RNasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN)	cRNA synthesis and labeling were performed according to manufacturers' (Affymetrix) recommendations, except that the labeling reactions were scaled down 50%.	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 		
Protocol Parameters						
Protocol Hardware						
Protocol Software			MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0		
Protocol Contact						
Protocol Term Source REF			mo			
SDRF File	E-GEOD-7432.sdrf.txt					
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version						
