Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis response to Response to Botrytis cinerea infection - AtGenExpress pathogen series					Comment[Submitted Name]	AtGenExpress: Pathogen Series: Response to Botrytis cinerea infection					Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array				Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO				Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array					Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis after infection with Botrytis cinerea					Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4					Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14					Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE5684					Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-5684					Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 17:19:12 Last Changed Rev: 13058					Experimental Factor Name	infect	time				Experimental Factor Type	infect	time				Experimental Factor Term Source REF						Person Last Name	(NASC)					Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre					Person Mid Initials						Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info					Person Phone						Person Fax						Person Address	"School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom"					Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)					Person Roles	submitter					Person Roles Term Source REF						Quality Control Type						Quality Control Term Source REF						Replicate Type						Replicate Term Source REF						Normalization Type						Normalization Term Source REF						Date of Experiment						Public Release Date	2008-06-14					Experiment Description	"AtGenExpress:  A multinational coordinated effort to uncover the transcriptome of the multicellular model organism Arabidopsis thaliana; The activity of genes and their encoded products can be regulated in several ways, but transcription is the primary level, since all other modes of regulation (RNA splicing, RNA and protein stability, etc.) are dependent on a gene being transcribed in the first place. The importance of transcriptional regulation has been underscored by the recent flood of global expression analyses, which have confirmed that transcriptional co-regulation of genes that act together is the norm, not the exception. Moreover, many studies suggest that evolutionary change is driven in large part by modifications of transcriptional programs. An essential first step toward deciphering the transcriptional code is to determine the expression pattern of all genes. With this goal in mind, an international effort to develop a gene expression atlas of Arabidopsis has been underway since fall 2003. This project, dubbed AtGenExpress, is funded by the DFG, and will provide the Arabidopsis community with access to a large set of Affymetrix microarray data. As part of this collaboration, we have generated expression data from 80 biologicaly different samples in triplicate. Responses to B. cinerea infection were assayed in wild-type Col-0 plants at 18 and 48 hours after inoculation of adult leaves. Leaves were inoculated by placing 4 5-ul drops of a 5x10e5 spore solution on each leaf. Control leaves were spotted with droplets of 24g L-1 potato dextrose broth medium. Experimenter name = Carine Denoux  , Fred Ausubel  , Julia Dewdney  , Simone Ferrari; Experimenter institute = AtGenExpress Experiment Overall Design: 12 samples were used in this experiment"					Protocol Name	P-G5684-3	P-G5684-2	P-G5684-1	P-G5684-4	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	hybridization	feature_extractionProtocol Description	"Four 5 ul droplets of sterile potato dextrose broth were placed on each of 4-5 fully expanded rosette leaves per plant. Plants were watered right before the experiment, leaving 500 ml of watered on the bottom of the flat, then inoculated, covered with a clear plastic lid. Leaves were harvested 18 hpi."	"Conidiospores of Botrytis cinerea were collected with sterile water from 2-week-old plates, pelletted and resuspended in 24 g L-1 sterile potato dextrose broth (Difco, Detroit, USA). Conidiospores were diluted to 5X10^5 spores/ml and pre-germinated at RT for 3 hours. Four 5 ul droplets were placed on each of 4-5 fully expanded rosette leaves per plant. Plants were watered right before the experiment, leaving 500 ml of watered on the bottom of the flat, then inoculated, covered with a clear plastic lid. Leaves were harvested 48 hpi."	"Conidiospores of Botrytis cinerea were collected with sterile water from 2-week-old plates, pelletted and resuspended in 24 g L-1 sterile potato dextrose broth (Difco, Detroit, USA). Conidiospores were diluted to 5X10^5 spores/ml and pre-germinated at RT for 3 hours. Four 5 ul droplets were placed on each of 4-5 fully expanded rosette leaves per plant. Plants were watered right before the experiment, leaving 500 ml of watered on the bottom of the flat, then inoculated, covered with a clear plastic lid. Leaves were harvested 18 hpi."	"Four 5 ul droplets of sterile potato dextrose broth were placed on each of 4-5 fully expanded rosette leaves per plant. Plants were watered right before the experiment, leaving 500 ml of watered on the bottom of the flat, then inoculated, covered with a clear plastic lid. Leaves were harvested 48 hpi."	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: Protocol Parameters						Protocol Hardware						Protocol Software					MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0Protocol Contact						Protocol Term Source REF					mo	SDRF File	E-GEOD-5684.sdrf.txt					Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo	Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	Term Source Version						