Investigation Title	Response of Arabidopsis thaliana to phenanthrene	
Comment[Submitted Name]	Response of Arabidopsis thaliana to phenanthrene	
Experimental Design	transcription profiling by array	
Experimental Design Term Source REF	EFO	
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4	
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE20009	
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2010-04-27	
Comment[Publication DOI]	10.1186/1471-2229-10-59	
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-20009	
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-04 02:48:37 Last Changed Rev: 13058	
Experimental Factor Name	TREATMENT	
Experimental Factor Type	treatment	
Experimental Factor Term Source REF	
Person Last Name	Alkio	Colón-Carmona	Weisman	
Person First Name	Merianne	Adán	David	
Person Mid Initials	
Person Email	
Person Phone	
Person Fax	
Person Address		Biology, University of Massachusetts Boston, 100 Morrissey Blvd, Boston, USA	
Person Affiliation		University of Massachusetts Boston	
Person Roles		submitter	
Person Roles Term Source REF		The MGED Ontology	
Quality Control Type	
Quality Control Term Source REF	
Replicate Type	
Replicate Term Source REF	
Normalization Type	
Normalization Term Source REF	
Date of Experiment	
Public Release Date	2010-04-27	
PubMed ID	20377843	
Publication DOI	20377843	
Publication Author List	Weisman D, Alkio M, Colon-Carmona A	
Publication Title	Transcriptional responses to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon induced stress in Arabidopsis thaliana reveal the involvement of hormone and defense signaling pathways.	
Publication Status	journal_article	
Publication Status Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology	
Experiment Description	Background:  Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are toxic, widely-distributed, environmentally persistent, and carcinogenic byproducts of carbon-based fuel combustion. Previously, plant studies have shown that PAHs induce oxidative stress, reduce growth, and cause leaf deformation as well as tissue necrosis. To understand the transcriptional changes that occur during these processes, we performed microarray experiments on Arabidopsis thaliana L. under phenanthrene treatment, and compared the results to published Arabidopsis microarray data representing a variety of stress and hormone treatments. In addition, to probe hormonal aspects of PAH stress, we assayed transgenic ethylene-inducible reporter plants as well as ethylene pathway mutants under phenanthrene treatment.  Results:  Microarray results revealed numerous perturbations in signaling and metabolic pathways that regulate reactive oxygen species (ROS) and responses related to pathogen defense. A number of glutathione S-transferases that may tag xenobiotics for transport to the vacuole were upregulated. Comparative microarray analyses indicated that the phenanthrene response was closely related to other ROS conditions, including pathogen defense conditions. The ethylene-inducible transgenic reporters were activated by phenanthrene. Mutant experiments showed that PAH inhibits growth through an ethylene-independent pathway, as PAH-treated ethylene-insensitive etr1-4 mutants exhibited a greater growth reduction than WT. Further, phenanthrene-treated, constitutive ethylene signaling mutants had longer roots than the untreated control plants, indicating that the PAH inhibits parts of the ethylene signaling pathway.  Conclusions:  This study identified major physiological systems that participate in the PAH-induced stress response in Arabidopsis. At the transcriptional level, the results identify specific gene targets that will be valuable in finding lead compounds and engineering increased tolerance. Collectively, the results open a number of new avenues for researching and improving plant resilience and PAH phytoremediation. Arabidopsis thaliana (ecotype Columbia) plants were long-day grown with +/- 0.25 mM phenanthrene in sterile plates at 23C for 21d before harvest.  At least 20 plants were pooled prior to each mRNA extraction.	
Protocol Name	P-GSE20009-2	P-GSE20009-4	P-GSE20009-3	P-GSE20009-5	P-GSE20009-6	P-GSE20009-7	P-GSE20009-8	P-GSE20009-9	P-GSE20009-10	P-GSE20009-1	
Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	grow	labeling	hybridization	image_aquisition	feature_extraction	feature_extraction	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation	
Protocol Description	Phenanthrene was thoroughly mixed into sterile media prior to pouring plates.	RNA was isolated using TRIzol (Molecular Research Center) per the manufacturer's instructions, DNAse treated (Invitrogen), and purified with RNeasy Mini Cleanup (Qiagen) per the manufacturers' instructions.	21d whole plants grown from sterilized seeds on 0.5MS + phytoagar, long-day light, 23C +/- 1C.	Labeling was performed with the Affymetrix Enzo kit per the manufacturer's instructions.	Chips were hybridized and processed on a Affymetrix Fluidics Station Model 450 per the manufacturer's instructions.	Hybridized chips were read on a model M10 scanner.	.CEL files were produced by the Affymetrix MAS, and normalization was performed in R/Bioconductor using the just.gcrma function with default parameters.		Values are unmodified outputs from Bioconductor/just.gcrma and represent the log2 transformation of the signal level.	ID_REF = <br>VALUE = GC-RMA log2 signal	
Protocol Parameters	
Protocol Hardware	
Protocol Software	
Protocol Contact	
Protocol Term Source REF							The MGED Ontology	The MGED Ontology	The MGED Ontology	The MGED Ontology	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-20009.sdrf.txt	
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	NCI_thesaurus	EFO	The MGED Ontology	
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	ncithesaurus.obo.alt	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version								
