Investigation Title	Assembly of the cell wall pectic matrix.					
Comment[Submitted Name]	Assembly of the cell wall pectic matrix.					
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array				
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO				
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array					
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Assembly of the cell wall pectic matrix.					
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14					
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6181					
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3					
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6181					
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 19:18:58 Last Changed Rev: 13058					
Experimental Factor Name	compound	dose				
Experimental Factor Type	compound	dose				
Experimental Factor Term Source REF						
Person Last Name	(NASC)					
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre					
Person Mid Initials						
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info					
Person Phone						
Person Fax						
Person Address	"School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom"					
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)					
Person Roles	submitter					
Person Roles Term Source REF						
Quality Control Type						
Quality Control Term Source REF						
Replicate Type						
Replicate Term Source REF						
Normalization Type						
Normalization Term Source REF						
Date of Experiment						
Public Release Date	2008-06-14					
PubMed ID						
Publication DOI						
Publication Author List						
Publication Title						
Publication Status						
Publication Status Term Source REF						
Experiment Description	"The primary cell walls of land plants are composed principally of a load bearing cellulose microfibril-hemicellulose network embedded in a matrix of pectic polysaccharides. The pectic matrix is multifunctional and in additional to a directly structural role it is central to many fundamental plant processes including cell expansion, defence and cell signalling. The sequencing of the Arabidopsis genome has revealed the massive investment made by plants in modulating the pectic matrix in response to local functional requirements but despite concerted biochemical-based efforts over many years none of the genes involved in pectin biosynthesis/pectic matrix assembly have so far been identified. The pectin matrix contains some of the most complex polysaccharides found in nature and based on linkage analysis it is known that at least 53 glycosyltransferases must be involved in its construction. Our proposal to identify genes involved in pectin biosynthesis and matrix assembly exploits the well characterised phenomenon that many plants and cultured plant cells that are exposed to treatments that disrupt the synthesis of one cell wall component are capable of a compensatory increases in other components - including pectin. Specifically suspension cultured cells that are incrementally exposed to increasing concentrations of the herbicide 26-dichlorobenzonitrile (DCB) which specifically inhibits cellulose synthesis compensate for the resulting almost complete loss of cellulose from their cell walls by constructing walls made predominantly of pectin. We believe that the significant up-regulation of pectin biosynthesis in this system offers an opportunity to identify genes that function in the assembly of the pectic matrix by microarray comparison of transcripts of DCB-treated Arabidopsis cells with untreated cells. The use of Arabidopsis suspension-cultured cells rather than plants or seedlings offers the significant advantage that extracted RNA would be derived from only one cell type. It is anticipated therefore that the output from a transcriptome analysis of this system will indicate a number of genes of unknown function and lead to the identification of genes involved in pectin biosynthesis and the assembly of the pectin matrix. Experiment Overall Design: 6 samples"					
Protocol Name	P-G6181-1	P-G6181-4	P-G6181-3	P-G6181-2	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	grow	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	"unknown; Parameter Medium = Murashige and Skooge; Parameter Nutrients = 30g/L sucrose, 0.5mg/L Napthalene acetic acid, 0.05mg/L Kinetin; Parameter Temperature = Unknown; Performer: William,,Willats"	"0.1 mM ISOXABEN ; Performer: William,,Willats"	"Qiagen / Trizol; Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol ; Protocol Type = nucleic_acid_extraction; Performer: William,,Willats"	"Preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA; RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Â&deg;C for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.   ; Protocol Type = labeling; Performers: John,Y,Okyere, Janet,,Higgins"	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters						
Protocol Hardware						
Protocol Software					MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact						
Protocol Term Source REF					mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6181.sdrf.txt					
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version						
