Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Brassica napus flowers of two isogenic lines J10AB and J03AB at different developmental stages						
Comment[Submitted Name]	Expression data from flowers of two isogenic lines J10AB and J03AB at different developmental stages						
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array					
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO					
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Brassica napus flowers from isogenic lines J03AB and J10AB at different developmental stages						
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-16						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE9721						
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4						
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-9721						
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-09 16:29:48 Last Changed Rev: 13058						
Experimental Factor Name	DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE	ORGANISM STATUS	LINE	GENOTYPE			
Experimental Factor Type	developmental_stage	organism_status	strain_or_line	genotype			
Experimental Factor Term Source REF							
Person Last Name	cai dong						
Person First Name	hua						
Person Mid Initials							
Person Email	dongch@oilcrops.cn						
Person Phone							
Person Fax							
Person Address	Functional genomics, Genomics and Molecular Biology , Institute of Oil Crops Research of CAAS , Xudong Second Road No2, Wuhan, 430062, China						
Person Affiliation	Institute of Oil Crops Research of CAAS						
Person Roles	submitter						
Person Roles Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology						
Quality Control Type							
Quality Control Term Source REF							
Replicate Type							
Replicate Term Source REF							
Normalization Type							
Normalization Term Source REF							
Date of Experiment							
Public Release Date	2008-06-16						
PubMed ID							
Publication DOI							
Publication Author List							
Publication Title							
Publication Status							
Publication Status Term Source REF							
Experiment Description	Dominant genic male sterility (DGMS) is a valuable system for hybrid seed production and improvement of plant populations, but the molecular mechanism of DGMS is not well understood. To facilitate the analysis of mechanism underlying DGMS, we compared gene expression profiles between fertile and sterile flowers of two pair of Brassica napus isogenic lines: J10AB and J03AB which only differ in sterility-related locus and fertility restore-related locus respectively by using Arabidopsis thaliana ATH-1 microarray. Gene expression profiling revealed that 360 genes differed in expression between the two lines and the number of differently expressed genes increased with progressing developmental stages. Cluster analysis result indicates that most important gene expression changes occur from PMC (anther less than 1mm) to uninucleate stage (anther in 3mm). There are 182 differential expressed genes detected between fertile plants and sterile plants at same stage.  Some important pathways related to fertility control by KEGG analysis, such as glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway, flavonoid biosynthesis pathway and fatty acid metabolism pathway. Another abortion usually associated with suppression of gene expression of these pathways. Experiment Overall Design: The Homozygous DGMS two-type line J10AB was compared with heterozygous two-type line J03AB at three different stages of development: tetrad stage, uninucleate stage and trinucleate stage (Flower buds <1, 1-3 and >3mm, respectively) which were confirmed by cytology observation. All these flower buds were collected by hand. For each stage, two biological repetitions and two experimental repetitions were used, resulting in four hybridizations per developmental stage. Gene expression was compared between lines at different stages of development, as well as between developmental stages of fertile plants and sterile plants of each line.						
Protocol Name	P-G9721-2	P-G9721-1	P-G9721-4	P-G9721-3	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat
Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation
Protocol Description	Flower buds were isolated from B. napus and were dissected on intact plants under the same growth conditions from the same field. The flower buds that are <1, 1, 2, 3 and >3 mm were harvested. All harvested samples including stamens and pistils were removed and immediately (<2 sec) frozen in liquid nitrogen to minimize post-harvest changes in gene expression. Flower buds were collected from at least two different biological repetitions within each line, from between two and four inflorescences on each plant, and from between two and four different plants from each line. Different flower bud samples were collected at approximately the same time of the day to avoid diurnal effects on gene expression.	Plants were prepared by growing the seeds in the rapeseed research field of Institute of Oil Crops Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences.	Total RNA was isolated from flower buds using Trizol reagent following instructions from the manufacturer (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and was then purified on RNeasy columns (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Total RNA with an absorbance A260/A280 ratio >1.8 was used for further analysis.	Biotinylated cRNA were prepared according to the standard Affymetrix protocol from 10 ug total RNA (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA).	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 
Protocol Parameters							
Protocol Hardware							
Protocol Software					MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact							
Protocol Term Source REF					mo		
SDRF File	E-GEOD-9721.sdrf.txt						
Term Source Name	The MGED Ontology		ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology	mo	
Term Source File	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php		http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version							
