Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-MEXP-2858
Investigation Title	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis wild type and transgenic lines grown under normal or salt stress conditions
Comment[Submitted Name]	Stress inducible expression of ApGSMT and ApDMT improved salt drought and low-temperature stress tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis
Publication Title	
Publication Author List	
Publication DOI	
PubMed ID	
Experimental Design	co-expression_design	compound_treatment_design	replicate_design	transcription profiling by array
Experimental Design Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology	The MGED Ontology	The MGED Ontology	EFO
Comment[MIAMExpressLogin]	Parulgly2010																										
Comment[MIAMExpressSubmissionID]	6889																										
Experiment Description	Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array was used to study the expression levels of 22,500 probe-sets representing 24,000 genes.  Both wild type and different transgenic lines were allowed to grow for one month under normal condition was taken for expression analysis. These plants were treated with half strength of Hoagland solution supplemented with 200mM NaCl in pots for seven days for salinity treatment. High quality RNA was extracted from the healthy leaf samples using TRI Reagent (Ambion, INC. USA) and pooled from  at least four independent stressed and non-stressed samples separately, and treated with DNase-I (QIAGEN GmbH, Germany). RNA cleanup was carried out using RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (QIAGEN GmbH, Germany) and 5µg of total RNA from each sample with three biological replications were reverse-transcribed to double stranded cDNA using the GeneChipR One-Cycle cDNA Synthesis Kit. The biotin-labelled cRNA was made using the GeneChipR IVT Labelling Kit (Affymetrix, CA, USA). Twenty microgram of cRNA samples was fragmented and was hybridized for 16 hours at 45°C to the Affymetrix Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array (Santa Clara, CA, USA). After washing and staining with R-phycoerythrin streptavidin in a Fluidics Station, using the GenechipR Fluidics Station 450, the arrays were scanned by the GenechipR 3000 Scanner. The chip images were scanned and extracted using default settings and the .CEL files were generated using Affymetrix GeneChip Command Console (AGCC) Software.<br>Atleast two ATH1 Genome Array was used for hybridisation for each group of samples.																										
Experimental Factor Name	COMPOUND	DOSE																									
Experimental Factor Type	compound	dose																									
Person Last Name	Lenka																										
Person First Name	Sangram																										
Person Mid Initials	K																										
Person Email	keshari2u@gmail.com																										
Person Phone	91-11-25843554																										
Person Affiliation	Indian Agricultural Research Institute																										
Person Address	National Research Centre on Plant Biotechnology, Pusa Campus, New Delhi, New Delhi, Delhi, 10012, India																										
Person Roles	submitter																										
Person Roles Term Source REF	MGED Ontology																										
Quality Control Type	biological_replicate																										
Public Release Date	2011-08-04																										
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2010-08-09 19:49:06																										
Protocol Name	P-MTAB-16438	P-MTAB-16439	P-MTAB-16440
Protocol Description	Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia (both wild type and transgenics) plants were allowed to grow in growth chamber (CONVIRON, Canada) operating at 24±2oC, 70-90% RH, 16/8 hrs of light/dark cycle at a light intensity of 100-125 ?mol m-2 s-1. wild type and different transgenic lines were allowed to grow for one month under normal condition was taken for expression analysis. These plants were treated with half strength of Hoagland solution supplemented with 200mM NaCl in pots for seven days for salinity treatment. <br>(Parameters: time unit = seconds, temperature unit = C, media = Soilrite)	High quality RNA was extracted from the healthy leaf samples using TRI Reagent (Ambion, INC. USA) and pooled from  at least four independent stressed and non-stressed samples separately, and treated with DNase-I (QIAGEN GmbH, Germany). RNA cleanup was carried out using RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (QIAGEN GmbH, Germany).<br>(Parameters: Extracted product = total_RNA, Amplification = none)	Wild type and different transgenic lines were allowed to grow for one month under normal condition was taken for expression analysis. These plants were treated with half strength of Hoagland solution supplemented with 200mM NaCl in pots for seven days for salinity treatment.																								
Protocol Type	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	specified_biomaterial_action																								
Protocol Term Source REF	MGED Ontology	MGED Ontology	MGED Ontology																								
Term Source Name	MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	The MGED Ontology	EFO
Term Source File	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress																									
SDRF File	E-MEXP-2858.sdrf.txt
