Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis wild-type plants and on an ANR1 knockout mutant as a means of identifying the (direct and indirect) downstream targets of ANR1 involved in nutritional regulation of root architecture				
Comment[Submitted Name]	Identification of genes involved in nutritional regulation of root architecture				
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array			
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO			
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array				
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis mutant for ANR1 after nitrate deprivation				
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-15				
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6824				
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3				
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6824				
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-07 16:05:59 Last Changed Rev: 13058				
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE	GROWTH CONDITION			
Experimental Factor Type	genotype	growth_condition			
Experimental Factor Term Source REF					
Person Last Name	(NASC)				
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre				
Person Mid Initials					
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info				
Person Phone					
Person Fax					
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom				
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)				
Person Roles	submitter				
Person Roles Term Source REF					
Quality Control Type					
Quality Control Term Source REF					
Replicate Type					
Replicate Term Source REF					
Normalization Type					
Normalization Term Source REF					
Date of Experiment					
Public Release Date	2008-06-15				
PubMed ID					
Publication DOI					
Publication Author List					
Publication Title					
Publication Status					
Publication Status Term Source REF					
Experiment Description	AIM:; 1. To identify genes that respond to N-deficiency and N-resupply and; 2. To identify the subset of these genes that are under the (direct or indirect) regulatory influence of the ANR1 MADS-box gene and which may therefore participate in the nutritional regulation of root architecture. BACKGROUND:; The Arabidopsis ANR1 gene is a key regulator of root architecture (Zhang and Forde, 1998): When ANR1 expression is suppressed (by antisense or co-suppression) the resulting lines are no longer able to proliferate their lateral roots in response to localised supplies of NO3- (Zhang and Forde, 1998). ANR1 encodes a root-specific member of the MADS box family of transcription factors and is thought to be a component of a signalling pathway that links an external NO3- signal to increase meristematic activity in the lateral root meristem (Zhang et al., 1999). ANR1 expression is modulated by changes in the NO3- supply (Zhang and Forde, 1998; Y.Gan and B.G. Forde, unpublished observations). In this experiment we will study the global changes in gene expression that occur when Arabidopsis plants are exposed to three different N regimes that are known to modulate ANR1 expression.  The treatments will be done on wild-type plants and on an ANR1 knockout mutant as a means of identifying the (direct and indirect) downstream targets of ANR1. This experiment is complementary to another microarray experiment (BBSRC grant no. 89/P13011) which is using a DEX-inducible ANR1 transgene to identify genes that are immediately downstream of ANR1 in the signal transduction cascade; Experimental:; Plants of the two genotypes will be grown in hydroponic culture in a growth cabinet for 4-5 weeks before subjecting them to the different N treatments:; 1) Continuous nitrate supply;; 2) N deprivation for 2.5 days; and; 3) N deprivation followed by 3 h nitrate induction. All harvesting will be done simultaneously to avoid diurnal effects. Roots from 12 seedlings will be harvested and pooled with roots from 12 seedlings whose treatment has been staggered by 24 h. We propose to replicate the experiment three times. References: Zhang, H. and Forde, B.G. (1998) Science 279, 407-409. Zhang, H. et al. (1999) Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96, 6529-6534. Experimenter name: Yinbo Gan; Experimenter phone: 01524 592935; Experimenter fax: 01524 843854; Experimenter department: Lancaster University; Experimenter address: Department of Biological Sciences; Experimenter address: Lancaster University; Experimenter address: Bailrigg; Experimenter address: Lancaster; Experimenter zip/postal_code: LA1 4YQ; Experimenter country: UK Experiment Overall Design: 6 samples were used in this experiment				
Protocol Name	P-G6824-2	P-G6824-1	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6	
Protocol Type	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	
Protocol Description	standard NASC extraction protocol	standard NASC labeling protocol	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	
Protocol Parameters					
Protocol Hardware					
Protocol Software			MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact					
Protocol Term Source REF			mo		
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6824.sdrf.txt				
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version					
