Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis to identify Tween 20 inducible genes										
Comment[Submitted Name]	Tween 20 inducible genes										
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array									
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO									
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array										
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis after treatment with polysorbate 80										
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE5513										
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2009-11-10										
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3										
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-5513										
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 16:26:35 Last Changed Rev: 13058										
Experimental Factor Name	COMPOUND	SAMPLING TIME POINT									
Experimental Factor Type	compound	sampling_time_point									
Experimental Factor Term Source REF											
Person Last Name	Hunzicker										
Person First Name	Gretel Mara										
Person Mid Initials											
Person Email	grechenm@yahoo.com.ar										
Person Phone											
Person Fax											
Person Address	Weiler, Plant Physiology, Ruhr-Universität , Universitätstr. 150, Bochum, 44803, Germany										
Person Affiliation	Ruhr-Universität										
Person Roles	submitter										
Person Roles Term Source REF											
Quality Control Type											
Quality Control Term Source REF											
Replicate Type											
Replicate Term Source REF											
Normalization Type											
Normalization Term Source REF											
Date of Experiment											
Public Release Date	2009-11-10										
PubMed ID	19876644										
Publication DOI	10.1007/s00425-009-1032-1										
Publication Author List	Hunzicker										
Publication Title	A novel regulatory system in plants involving medium-chain fatty acids.										
Publication Status	published										
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO										
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796										
Experiment Description	Polyethylene glycol sorbitan monoacylates (Tween) are detergents of widespread use in plant sciences. We show them, notably Tween 20, to cause a rapid and complex change in transcript abundance which bears all characteristics of a PAMP / elicitor-induced defense response, and they do so at concentrations which cause no detectable deleterious effects on plant cellular integrity. The activity does not reside in the intact Tween molecule itself, but is caused by medium-chain fatty acids, notably lauric acid (LA), which are efficiently released from the Tween-backbone by the plant. The Tween / LA-response is independent of the jasmonate signalling system. Medium-chain fatty acids are thus novel elicitors/regulators of plant pathogen defense. The results also have several practical implications: (i) The use of Tweens and, as we show, several other detergents, as solvating/wetting agents on intact plants causes profound physiological changes which may mask actual effects of test compounds; (ii) Tweens by themselves can be regarded (and probably used) as economical, non-toxic, and safe-to-apply elicitors of inducible plant immunity against pathogens. Experiment Overall Design: In preliminary Northern blot experiments using the Arabidopsis thaliana genes OPR1 / OPR2, strongest responses were observed between 1 h and 2.5 h after foliar treatment with 0.2 % Tween 20 solution (approx. 1.6 mM). These conditions were thus chosen for the microarray experiments. Three experiments were carried out, two 1 h after the onset of the Tween treatment (expt. IA and IB which are biological repetitions; GSM126247, GSM126248; GSM126990, GSM126991 files) and one after 2.5 h (expt. II; GSM126244, GSM126246 files, c and t respectively) to allow a distinction between fast, transient and slower, more permanent responses.  Experiment Overall Design: All the experiments were conducted at the same day time in the morning. For every experiment a total of three independent replicas (33 Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 plants per experiment) were done. The plants used were 28 days old, growing under sterile conditions in 0.5 L glass jars containing MS medium. The controls were sprayed with water and the samples with 0.2 % (w/v) Tween 20 detergent. The plant material was collected in a random way from the different glass jars, the samples were dried in tissue paper, weighted (1 g) and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. This complete procedure took place in less than 1 min. Total RNA extraction from every individual experiment was made with TRIzol. Once the RNA quality of every independent induction experiment was satisfactory, the RNA samples were mixed.  Experiment Overall Design: RNA quality and quantity control, cRNA labeling, hybridizations, expression data normalization and analysis were performed in collaboration with Carsten Müssig and Thomas Altmann (Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm) according to the Affymetrix manual. Clustering was performed using the Access and the MAPMAN program. Experiment Overall Design: The levels of 118 transcripts were elevated (2-fold) after 1 h, i.e., in both, the IA and IB arrays, but only 12 levels were reduced (by  2-fold). In the 2.5 h array the corresponding numbers were 137 and 11. The transcript levels of 38 genes were found elevated in all three arrays. The validity of the array data was checked for 25 randomly-picked genes out of the 38 genes by RT-PCR.										
Protocol Name	P-G5513-2	P-G5513-8	P-G5513-5	P-G5513-7	P-G5513-1	P-G5513-6	P-G5513-10	P-G5513-4	P-G5513-9	P-AFFY-6	P-G5513-3
Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	grow	grow	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	nucleic_acid_extraction	nucleic_acid_extraction	nucleic_acid_extraction	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation
Protocol Description	The plants were sprayed with distilled water and the leave material was weighted and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. The harvesting time was 2.5 h after the treatment.	The samples were sprayed with distilled water	For every experiment a total of three independent replicas (33 Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 plants per experiment) were done. The plants used were growing under sterile conditions in 0.5 L glass jars containing MS medium (supplemented with vitamins and with 1% (w/v) sucrose and 0.8 % (w/v) agar). Growth occurred in a growth chamber with 8 h of light (150 ?E m-2 s-1 photosynthetically active radiation) and 16 h of darkness under controlled conditions (22?C to 24?C at day 18?C to 20?C at night and 70 to 90 % relative humidity).	The plants used were growing under sterile conditions in 0.5 L glass jars containing MS medium (supplemented with vitamins and with 1% (w/v) sucrose and 0.8 % (w/v) agar).	For every experiment a total of three independent replicas (33 Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 plants per experiment) were done. The plants used were growing under sterile conditions in 0.5 L glass jars containing MS medium (supplemented with vitamins and with 1% (w/v) sucrose and 0.8 % (w/v) agar). Growth occurred in a growth chamber with 8 h of light (150 µE m-2 s-1 photosynthetically active radiation) and 16 h of darkness under controlled conditions (22°C to 24°C at day 18°C to 20°C at night and 70 to 90 % relative humidity).	Total RNA from 1 g of leaf material was extracted with TRIzol? (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany). Three independently isolated RNA-samples were pooled for each experiment. RNA quality and quantity control, cRNA labeling, hybridizations, expression data normalization and analysis were performed in collaboration with Carsten M?and Thomas Altmann (Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm) according to the Affymetrix manual and as described by M?et al. (2003).	The plant material was collected in a random way from the different glass jars, the samples were dried in tissue paper, weighted (1 g) and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. This complete procedure took place in less than 1 min. Total RNA extraction from every individual experiment was made with TRIzol? reagent (Invitrogen, Germany). Once the RNA quality of every independent induction experiment was satisfactory, the RNA samples were mixed. The samples were hybridized in collaboration with Dr. Carsten M?(MPI for Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm, Potsdam, Germany).	Total RNA from 1 g of leaf material was extracted with TRIzol® (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany). Three independently isolated RNA-samples were pooled for each experiment. RNA quality and quantity control, cRNA labeling, hybridizations, expression data normalization and analysis were performed in collaboration with Carsten Müssig and Thomas Altmann (Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm) according to the Affymetrix manual and as described by Müssig et al. (2003).	The plant material was collected in a random way from the different glass jars, the samples were dried in tissue paper, weighted (1 g) and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. This complete procedure took place in less than 1 min. Total RNA extraction from every individual experiment was made with TRIzol® reagent (Invitrogen, Germany). Once the RNA quality of every independent induction experiment was satisfactory, the RNA samples were mixed. The samples were hybridized in collaboration with Dr. Carsten Müssig (MPI for Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm, Potsdam, Germany).	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	The data were analyzed with Microarray Suite version 5.0 (MAS 5.0) using Affymetrix default analysis settings and global scaling as normalization method.
Protocol Parameters											
Protocol Hardware											
Protocol Software										MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact											
Protocol Term Source REF											
SDRF File	E-GEOD-5513.sdrf.txt										
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology					
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php					
Term Source Version											
