Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis phosphate deficient mutant, pho 1	
Comment[Submitted Name]	Hammond_2: (2)Differential gene expression patterns in the phosphate deficient mutant, pho 1	
Experimental Design	individual_genetic_characteristics_design	strain_or_line_design	transcription profiling by array	
Experimental Design Term Source REF		mo	EFO	
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]		
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3	
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-NASC-60	
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-11 19:21:17 Last Changed Rev: 13058	
Experimental Factor Name	individual_genetic_characteristic	
Experimental Factor Type	individual_genetic_characteristic	
Experimental Factor Term Source REF	
Person Last Name	unknown	Hammond	
Person First Name	unknown	John	
Person Mid Initials	
Person Email		john.hammond@hri,ac.uk	
Person Phone	+44 (0)115 951 3091	01789 470382	
Person Fax	+44 (0)115 951 3297	01789 470552	
Person Address	Plant Science Division, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonnington Campus, Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK	Plant Sciences Division School of Biosciences University of Nottingham Sutton Bonington Campus Loughborough  LE12 5RD UK 	
Person Affiliation		University of Nottingham	
Person Roles		biosource_provider;investigator;submitter	
Person Roles Term Source REF		mo	
Quality Control Type	
Quality Control Term Source REF	
Replicate Type	
Replicate Term Source REF	
Normalization Type	
Normalization Term Source REF	
Date of Experiment	
Public Release Date	
PubMed ID	
Publication DOI	
Publication Author List	
Publication Title	
Publication Status	
Publication Status Term Source REF	
Experiment Description	Background:  The UK horticultural and agricultural industries routinely apply large amounts of inorganic fertiliser to maintain crop yield and quality, since chemical assays of soil nutrients are unreliable. Excessive fertiliser applications are costly and can lead to unnecessary pollution. A possible solution is to use sensor (GM or non-GM) technologies that exploit the changes in plant gene expression under incipient nutrient deficiency. Aim:  The aim of this project is to use mutants with reduced leaf phosphate contents to identify genes upregulated in response to phosphate stress. Preliminary gene expression analysis has identified several phosphate responsive genes to be upregulated in the pho1 mutant. However, further replicates of the experiment are required to confirm these changes. Methods:  Arabidopsis mutant pho1 (N8507) and its parent ecotype Columbia 2 (N907) will be grown on MS agar under identical conditions. RNA will be extracted from the rosette leaves of both parent and mutant and the same growth stage. By comparing the expression profiles, we will be able to differentiate between genes that are upregulated in leaves experiencing phosphate stress. Previously, two GeneChips have been used (mutant and parent) to provide preliminary data. A further two biological replicates are now required to confirm these results. Promoters and transcripts of these genes will underpin the development of novel sensor technologies, and knowledge of the gene expression profiles will improve our understanding of the physiology of plant mineral nutrition.	
Protocol Name	NASCGrowProt:538	NASCExtractProtocol:1	NASCLabelProtocol:1	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-EukGE-WS2v4	Affymetrix:Protocol:Percentile	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat	
Protocol Type		nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation	
Protocol Description	Title: Growth protocol. Description: Seeds were first washed in 70 % (v/v) ethanol/water, rinsed in distilled water and surface sterilised using 50 % (v/v) domestic bleach/water. Seeds were then rinsed three times in sterile distilled water and imbibed for 3-5 days at 4 degrees C to break dormancy. Seeds were grown in un-vented, polycarbonate culture boxes on 75 ml of 0.8 % (w/v) agar containing 1 % (w/v) sucrose and a basal salt mix (Murashige and Skoog, 1962). Illumination was provided by a bank of 100W 84 cool fluorescent tubes (Philips, Eindhoven, Netherlands) giving an photon flux density between 400 and 700 nm of 50-80 µmol photons m-2 s-1 at plant height. Once plant reached the desired growth stage, rosette leaves were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and total RNA extracted.	Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol 	RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Ã‚Â°C for 10 minutes.  First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃƒÂŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.	Title: Fluidics Station Protocol. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL Analysis (Percentile). Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 	
Protocol Parameters	Humidity;Atmosphere;location;Temperature;	
Protocol Hardware	
Protocol Software				MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact	
Protocol Term Source REF						The MGED Ontology	
SDRF File	E-NASC-60.sdrf.txt	
Term Source Name	NCI_thesaurus		nasc	ncbitax	mo	ArrayExpress	mo	EFO	The MGED Ontology	
Term Source File	ncithesaurus.obo.alt		http://arabidopsis.info/catalogue.html	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/taxonomyhome.html	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version										
