Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-46205
MAGE-TAB Version	1.1								
Public Release Date	2013-09-01
Investigation Title	A spatiotemporal understanding of growth regulation during the salt-stress response (Affymetrix)								
Comment[Submitted Name]	A spatiotemporal understanding of growth regulation during the salt-stress response (Affymetrix)
Experiment Description	Cell-type specific transcriptional profiles were generated by FACS (Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting) sorting of roots that express cell-type specific GFP-reporters.  Four different GFP-reporter lines were utilized allowing us to obtain transcriptional profiles for cells in major radial zones of the root.  FACS cell populations were isolated from roots grown under standard conditions or roots that had been transfered to media supplemented with 140 mM NaCl for 1 hour, 3 hours, 8 hours, 20 hours, 32 hours and 48 hours. Plant environmental responses involve dynamic changes in growth and signaling, yet little is understood as to how progress through these temporal events is controlled.  In this study we explore the phenotypic and transcriptional events involved in the acclimation of the Arabidopsis seedling root to a rapid change in salinity.  Using live-imaging analysis, we show that growth is dynamically regulated with a period of growth quiescence followed by growth recovery and homeostasis.  Through the development and analysis of a new high-resolution spatiotemporal transcriptional map, we have identified the key hormone signaling pathways that regulate specific transcriptional programs, predict their spatial domain of action and link the activity of these pathways to the control of specific phases of growth control. Through the use of tissue-specific approaches to suppress the ABA pathway, we demonstrate that ABA signaling likely acts in select tissue layers to control spatially localized transcriptional programs and promote growth recovery.  In addition to the biological pathways directly affecting growth, we show that salt also controls many tissue-specific and time-point specific transcriptional responses that are expected to modify water transport, Casparian strip formation and protein translation.  Together, our data reveal a sophisticated assortment of regulatory programs acting together to coordinate spatially patterned biological changes involved in the immediate and long-term response to a stressful shift in environment. 4 different GFP reporter lines were used to isolate specific populations of cells from the Arabidopsis root using FACS sorting of protoplasted cells.  GFP-reporter lines were grown under standard conditions before protoplasting and sorting or they were transfered to media supplemented with 140mM NaCl for a series of time: 1 hour, 3 hours, 8 hours, 20 hours, 32 hours and 48 hours before hand, as well as standard controls for 1 hour and 48 hours. 3 replicates for each condition was used.								
Term Source Name	ArrayExpress	EFO
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl							
Person Last Name	Dinneny	Geng	Wu	Wee	Xie	Wei	Tham	Duan	Dinneny
Person First Name	Jose	Yu	Rui	Choon-Wei	Fei	Xueliang	Cliff	Lina	Jose
Person Mid Initials	Ramon								R
Person Email	dinneny@stanford.edu								
Person Affiliation	Carnegie Institution for Science, Department of Plant Biology								
Person Address	Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Department of Plant Biology, 260 Panama St, Stanford, United States, USA								
Person Roles	submitter								
Protocol Name	P-GSE46205-1	P-GSE46205-5	P-GSE46205-6	P-GSE46205-2	P-GSE46205-3	P-GSE46205-4	P-GSE46205-7		
Protocol Description	Data quality was examined using the signal distribution of Affymetrix built-in controls (Spike-in and hybridization controls) using Expression Console software (Affymetrix) and AffyQCReport. GCRMA in R/Bioconductor was used for data normalization. ID_REF =  VALUE = log2 GC-RMA signal	Fragmented cRNA probes were prepared using the one-cycle amplification protocol by Affymetrix.	Arrays were washed using a GeneChip® Fluidics Station 450 and GeneChip® Hybridization, Wash, and Stain Kit (Affymetrix), and performed in the microarray facilities located at the Biopolis Shared Facilities, Agency of Science and Technology Research, Singapore	Samples were prepared as in Birnbaum et al. (2005) Nat. Methods for roots grown under standard conditions for 1hr and 48hrs before protoplasting. For salt treated samples, roots were transferred to 140 mM NaCl for 1hr, 3hrs, 8hrs, 20hrs, 32hrs, and 48hrs before protoplasting.	Seeds were surface sterilized with 20% Bleach and 0.1% Tween for 5 minutes and then rinsed 3 times with sterile water. Seeds were stratified at 4ËšC for 2 days before being planted on standard media. Standard media is 1X concentration Murashige and Skoog salt mixture (Caisson laboratories), 0.5g/L MES, 1% sucrose, 1% agar and adjusted to pH 5.7 with KOH. Salt media is standard media with 140mM NaCl added. Nylon mesh was placed on top of the solidified media and seeds were evenly placed on the mesh at a density of ~20 seeds/cm in two rows.	RNA was extracted using the RNAeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen GmbH).	Data acquisition was on a GeneChip® Scanner (Affymetrix), and performed in the microarray facilities located at the Biopolis Shared Facilities, Agency of Science and Technology Research, Singapore		
Protocol Type	normalization data transformation protocol	labelling protocol	hybridization protocol	sample treatment protocol	growth protocol	nucleic acid extraction protocol	array scanning protocol		
Experimental Factor Name	GFP-REPORTER	GROWTH MEDIA	CELL TYPE						
Experimental Factor Type	gfp-reporter	growth media	cell type						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE46205								
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2013-09-01								
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2013-04-18								
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2013-09-03								
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array								
SDRF File	E-GEOD-46205.sdrf.txt
