Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis accessions Bayreuth-0 and Shahdara treated with salicylic acid or a control solution to identify natural variation in response						
Comment[Submitted Name]	Arabidopsis Bayreuth-0 (Bay-0) and Shahdara (Sha) - Salicylic acid treatment						
Experimental Design	time_series_design	compound_treatment_design	strain_or_line_design	transcription profiling by array			
Experimental Design Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology	The MGED Ontology		EFO			
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis Bayreuth-0 and Shahdara after treatment with salicylic acid						
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4						
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2009-07-17						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]							
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-TABM-520						
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-12 18:57:50 Last Changed Rev: 13058						
Experimental Factor Name	DOSE	ECOTYPE	TREATMENT TIME				
Experimental Factor Type	dose	ecotype	time				
Experimental Factor Term Source REF							
Person Last Name	St.Clair						
Person First Name	Dina						
Person Mid Initials							
Person Email	dastclair@ucdavis.edu						
Person Phone							
Person Fax							
Person Address	114 Amundson Hall, UC Davis, Davis, CA, USA						
Person Affiliation	UC Davis Plant Sciences						
Person Roles	submitter						
Person Roles Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology						
Quality Control Type	biological_replicate	peer_review_quality_control	spike_quality_control				
Quality Control Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology		The MGED Ontology				
Replicate Type							
Replicate Term Source REF							
Normalization Type							
Normalization Term Source REF							
Date of Experiment							
Public Release Date	2009-07-17						
PubMed ID							
Publication DOI							
Publication Author List							
Publication Title							
Publication Status							
Publication Status Term Source REF							
Experiment Description	The study of natural genetic variation for plant disease resistance responses is a complementary approach to utilizing mutants to elucidate genetic pathways. While some key genes involved in pathways controlling disease resistance, and signaling intermediates such as salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA), have been identified through mutational analyses, the use of genetic variation in natural populations permits the identification of change-of-function alleles, which likely act in a quantitative manner. Whole genome microarrays, such as Affymetrix GeneChips, allow for molecular characterization of the disease response at a genomics level and characterization of differences in gene expression due to natural variation. Differences in the level of gene expression, or expression level polymorphisms (ELPs), can be mapped in a segregating population to identify regulatory quantitative trait loci (expression QTLs, e-QTLs) affecting host resistance responses. We assessed Arabidopsis accessions Bayreuth-0 (Bay-0) and Shahdara (Sha) for natural variation in the response to SA. We treated vegetatively grown plants with either SA or a control solution (Silwet), and harvested the plants 4, 28, or 52 hours after chemical treatment. We present Affymetrix GeneChip microarray expression data for 2 biological replications of the SA-treated samples for Bay-0 and Sha. The GeneChip microarray expression data for the control (Silwet-treated) samples was submitted as E-TABM-61. Normalized data is not provided here as the normalization step was included in the data statistical analsyses - for more information please contact the experiment provider.						
Protocol Name	P-TABM-2854	P-TABM-103	P-TABM-hans16	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-EukGE-WS2v4	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-EukGE-WS2v4_450	P-AFFY-6	
Protocol Type	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	hybridization	feature_extraction	
Protocol Description	Seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana accessions Bay-0 and Sha were obtained from ABRC through TAIR (www.arabidopsis.org).  A factorial experiment was conducted with two biological replicates of the two accessions.  For each biological replicate, multiple plants (~50) per accession were grown in a growth chamber under short day conditions (8 hr light at 100-120 microEinsteins, 20 degrees C day/20 degrees C night) to maintain plants in the vegetative phase for six weeks.  The growth chambers used a combination of metal halide, mercury vapor, and incandescent lamps.  Plants were watered with half-strength Hoagland's solution.  SA and/or Silwet treatment: Six-week-old plants were sprayed with 0.30 mM SA (salicylic acid, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)  in 0.02% Silwet L77 to run-off, and control plants were sprayed with 0.02% Silwet L77, a surfactant (Lehle Seeds, Round Rock, TX, USA), alone.  Vegetative leaves from plants from each combination of accession and treatment were harvested at 4, 28, and 52 hours post-treatment, and quick-frozen in liquid nitrogen for subsequent RNA extractions. Three plants per accession were bulked for each treatment/time point combination. Each plant was harvested only once. To avoid diurnal variation in gene expression, the time points were 24 hrs apart and harvesting was always performed over a 30 minute period at the same time of day (1:00 PM).  ONLY THE SA TREATED SAMPLES ARE INCLUDED IN THIS SUBMISSION; THE SW TREATED (CONTROL) SAMPLES WERE SUBMITTED PREVIOUSLY (E-TABM-61).	RNA was extracted from the bulked plants using TRIzol as per the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), followed by purification on RNeasy columns (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA).	cDNA and labeled cRNA were prepared according to the manufacturer’s guidelines in the GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual 701021 rev1 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA).  cDNA synthesis was performed with enzymes purchased from Invitrogen, and biotin labeling was conducted using an ENZO IVT labeling kit as per the GeneChip manufacturer's protocols.	Title: Fluidics Station Protocol. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix EukGE-WS2v4_450 Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	
Protocol Parameters							
Protocol Hardware							
Protocol Software				MicroArraySuite 5.0		MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact							
Protocol Term Source REF					mo		
SDRF File	E-TABM-520.sdrf.txt						
Term Source Name	mo	NCBI Taxonomy	po	ArrayExpress	The MGED Ontology	EFO	mo
Term Source File	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://www.plantontology.org	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version							
