Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-26983							
Public Release Date	2011-10-05							
Investigation Title	Comparison of salt stress resistance genes in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana indicates that extent of transcriptomic change may not predict secondary phenotypic or fitness effects							
Comment[Submitted Name]	Comparison of salt stress resistance genes in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana indicates that extent of transcriptomic change may not predict secondary phenotypic or fitness effects							
Experiment Description	Engineered abiotic stress resistance is an important target for increasing agricultural productivity.There are concerns, however, regarding possible ecological impacts of transgenic crops. In contrast to the first wave of transgenic crops, many abiotic stress resistance genes can initiate complex downstream changes. Transcriptome profiling has been suggested as a comprehensive non-targeted approach to examine secondary effects. We compared phenotypic and transcriptomic effects of constitutive expression of genes intended to confer salt stress tolerance by three different mechanisms: a transcription factor, CBF3/DREB1a; a metabolic gene, M6PR,  for mannitol biosynthesis; and the Na+/H+ antiporter, SOS1. Transgenic CBF3, M6PR, and SOS1 Arabidopsis thaliana were grown together in the growth chamber, greenhouse and field. In the absence of salt, M6PR and SOS1 lines performed comparably to wild type; CBF3 lines exhibited dwarfing as reported previously. All three transgenes conferred fitness advantage when subjected to 100 mM NaCl in the growth chamber. CBF3 and M6PR affected transcription of numerous abiotic stress- related genes as measured by Affymetrix microarray analysis. M6PR additionally modified expression of biotic- and oxidative- stress genes. Transcriptional effects of SOS1 in the absence of salt were smaller and primarily limited to redox-related genes. The extent of transcriptome change, however, did not correlate with effects on growth and reproduction. Thus, magnitude of global transcriptome differences may not predict phenotypic differences upon which environment and selection act to influence fitness. These observations have implications for interpretation of transcriptome analyses in the context of risk assessment and emphasize importance of evaluation within a phenotypic context. Both transgenic plants and relative WT plants were grown in the growth chamber in the absence and presence of salt stress. Plants from 20 days after sowing (6 days after salt treatment) were used for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix microarrays. There were two biological replicates for each genotype and salt treatment combination.							
Date of Experiment								
Term Source Name	EFO							
Term Source Version								
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl							
Person Last Name	Chan	Chan	Loescher	Grumet				
Person First Name	Zhulong	Zhulong	Wayne	Rebecca				
Person Mid Initials								
Person Email	chanzhul@msu.edu							
Person Affiliation	Michigan State University							
Person Phone								
Person Fax								
Person Address	Michigan State University, Plant and Soil Sciences Bldg, Lansing, MI, USA							
Person Roles	submitter							
Person Roles Term Source REF								
Person Roles Term Accession Number								
Normalization Type								
Normalization Term Accession Number								
Normalization Term Source REF								
Replicate Type								
Replicate Term Accession Number								
Replicate Term Source REF								
Experimental Design								
Experimental Design Term Accession Number								
Experimental Design Term Source REF								
Quality Control Type								
Quality Control Term Accession Number								
Quality Control Term Source REF								
Protocol Name	P-GSE26983-1	P-GSE26983-6	P-GSE26983-3	P-GSE26983-8	P-GSE26983-7	P-GSE26983-2	P-GSE26983-4	P-GSE26983-5
Protocol Description	ID_REF = <br>VALUE = RMA-calculated log2 intensity	standard Affymetrix procedures	Seeds of both transgenic and wild type plants were sown as described above with two replicate pots for each genotype and salt combination. Plants were grown at 23/18 °C in the growth chamber under a short-day cycle (10h light/14 h dark) at 350 μmol m-2s-1 and 70% relative humidity in order to increase seedling leaf area and growth while not promoting bolting. Sampling time was performed at 20 DAS by collecting developed but not senescent leaves (about 0.5cm width × 1.5cm length) from at least 15 seedlings.	All the Affymetrix data files produced with Affymetrix GCOS software (*.CEL files) were analyzed using Bioconductor, a public source software for the analyses of genomic data rooted in the statistical computing environment R. The data were normalized by robust multioiarray normalization of probe-level data with RMA and analyzed using affylmGUI running on R software.	standard Affymetrix procedures	Plants subjected to salt stress were watered with NaCl solution which was dissolved in ½ Strength Hoagland Solution. Salt treatment started at 14 DAS . Plants were watered from below to field capacity and then sprayed with the same concentration of NaCl solution from the top, ensuring adequate leaching and preventing excess salinity. The concentrations of NaCl supplementation were increased stepwise by 50 mM every 2 days for each line, to the indicated maximum (0, 100 mM). Plants were then watered every 2 days with or without NaCl at the indicated concentrations. The flats were rotated in the growth chamber everyday to minimize the effect of growth condition.	Total RNA was extracted and purified using QIAGEN-RNeasy Mini Kit according to guidelines specified by the manufacturer.	Ten µg of total RNA was processed to produce biotinylated cRNA targets.
Protocol Software								
Protocol Hardware								
Protocol Contact								
Protocol Type	bioassay_data_transformation	hybridization	grow	feature_extraction	image_aquisition	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling
Protocol Term Source REF								
Protocol Term Accession Number								
Experimental Factor Name	COMPOUND	ECOTYPE	GENOTYPE					
Experimental Factor Type	compound	ecotype	genotype					
Experimental Factor Term Source REF								
Experimental Factor Term Accession Number								
Publication Title	Comparison of salt stress resistance genes in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana indicates that extent of transcriptomic change may not predict secondary phenotypic or fitness effects.							
Publication Author List	Chan Z, Bigelow PJ, Loescher W, Grumet R.							
PubMed ID	22070784							
Publication DOI	10.1111/j.1467-7652.2011.00661.x							
Publication Status	published							
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO							
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796							
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE26983							
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2011-10-07							
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis expressing SOS1, M6PR or CBF3 under the control of the 35S promoter							
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array							
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2011-10-04							
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2011-01-31							
SDRF File	E-GEOD-26983.sdrf.txt							
