Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis microgametogenesis				
Comment[Submitted Name]	Transcriptome analysis of Arabidopsis microgametogenesis				
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array			
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO			
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array				
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis pollen grains at different stages of development				
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14				
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6162				
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4				
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6162				
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 19:13:27 Last Changed Rev: 13058				
Experimental Factor Name	DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE				
Experimental Factor Type	developmental_stage				
Experimental Factor Term Source REF					
Person Last Name	(NASC)				
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre				
Person Mid Initials					
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info				
Person Phone					
Person Fax					
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom				
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)				
Person Roles	submitter				
Person Roles Term Source REF					
Quality Control Type					
Quality Control Term Source REF					
Replicate Type					
Replicate Term Source REF					
Normalization Type					
Normalization Term Source REF					
Date of Experiment					
Public Release Date	2008-06-14				
PubMed ID	15535861				
Publication DOI	10.1186/gb-2004-5-11-r85				
Publication Author List	Honys D, Twell D.				
Publication Title	Transcriptome analysis of haploid male gametophyte development in Arabidopsis.				
Publication Status	published				
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO				
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796				
Experiment Description	Aims We aim to use transcriptome analysis to establish on a genome-wide scale the identity and regulatory clusters of genes that specify microgametogenesis from the haploid microspore to mature functional pollen in Arabidopsis. Background Pollen as the haploid male gametophyte plays a vital role in plant fertility and crop production through the ability to deliver the male gametes in fertilisation. Despite the obvious importance for plant fertility and crop production we have a very limited understanding of the regulatory mechanisms that have evolved to specify male gametophyte development and functions and less than 150 genes have been identified that are gametophytically expressed in the anther.The availability of functional genomic resources now provides the opportunity to undertake a comprehensive approach to describing cellular development in terms of the transcriptome. This approach is particularly powerful where the complete transcriptome of a single developing cell can be analysed. The male gametophyte is a uniquely accessible cell type for such studies, enabling RNA analysis from distinct purified cell populations during development.The proposed experiments are designed to support a current application (P19208, Twell) to investigate the gametophytic transcriptome and transcription factor networks. The results obtained will extend our knowledge of the contribution of haploid gene expression to anther development and will be used directly to extend BBSRC funded work (P15086, Wilson) to investigate the role and targets the MALE STERILE 1 gene (MS1). In particular the data will be used in collaboration to extract haploid gene expression from datasets of transcriptome analysis of staged flower buds of wild type (Ler) and ms1.  This work will also complement BBSRC funded work on sporogenesis (G13338, Dickinson and Scott) and meiosis (G15941, Franklin and Jones) that are focussed on earlier steps in anther development. Biological material and methods.  Isolated microspores and pollen at 4 different developmental stages will be analysed. We will isolate spores from developmentally staged buds of Ler grown under defined growth conditions. Buds from several batches of 100 plants will be rapidly sorted into 4 groups according to developmental age, uninucleate microspores (UM), bicellular pollen (BP) tricellular pollen (TP) and mature pollen. Spores will be released by gentle mechanical tissue disruption and purified by filtration and purification of spores. We are confident that our spore isolation procedures are rigorous since we could not detect even trace expression of highly abundant sporophytic transcripts such RbcS and Cab transcripts in microarray data from pollen RNA. Experiment Overall Design: Number of plants pooled:over 100				
Protocol Name	P-G6162-1	P-G6162-3	P-G6162-2	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	unknown; Parameter location = Growth Room; Parameter Atmosphere = Normal; Parameter Temperature = 21oC; Parameter Lighting = 16h light; Parameter Medium = compost; Performer: David,,Honys	Qiagen / Trizol; Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol ; Protocol Type = nucleic_acid_extraction; Performer: David,,Honys	Preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA; RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Â&deg;C for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.   ; Protocol Type = labeling; Performers: John,Y,Okyere, Janet,,Higgins	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters					
Protocol Hardware					
Protocol Software				MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact					
Protocol Term Source REF				mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6162.sdrf.txt				
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version					
