Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-43551							
MAGE-TAB Version	1.1							
Public Release Date	2014-03-13							
Investigation Title	Chloroplast-dependent programmed cell death is activated in Arabidopsis cell cultures after singlet oxygen production by Rose Bengal							
Comment[Submitted Name]	Chloroplast-dependent programmed cell death is activated in Arabidopsis cell cultures after singlet oxygen production by Rose Bengal							
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis cell suspension cultures subjected to mild treatments with three different singlet oxygen elicitors (Indigo Carmine (IC), Methylene Violet (MV) and Rose Bengal (RB)) against untreated controls							
Experiment Description	Arabidopsis thaliana cell suspension cultures (ACSC) were subjected to 30-min, mild chemical treatments with three different singlet oxygen elicitors at low-medium light conditions (150 µE m–2 s–1) with the aim of getting a better understanding of singlet oxygen-mediated defence responses in plants. The three elicitors Indigo Carmine (IC), Methylene Violet (MV) and Rose Bengal (RB) at a concentration of 0.5 µM were chosen because they exhibited different abilities to permeate the plasma membrane and to accumulate in the cell soma or organelles such as chloroplasts. In addition, ACSC were treated with 500 µM H2O2 for comparison. Confocal image analysis of Arabidopsis cells revealed that IC was not retained in cells, whereas MV and RB permeated the plasma membrane and accumulated in the chloroplast envelope and inside chloroplasts, respectively. As a consequence of their different cellular location, the physiological, transcriptional and photosynthetic responses of Arabidopsis cells to singlet oxygen production varied from each other and the activation of programmed cell death (PCD) was observed in ACSC treated with 0.5 µM RB, but not with the other elicitor nor with 500 µM H2O2. The role of chloroplasts in the activation of PCD was further investigated when this physiological response was analyzed in dark-grown cell cultures containing undifferentiated plastids. Interestingly, PCD was only activated in light-grown, but not in dark-grown, Arabidopsis cell cultures, suggesting that singlet oxygen-mediated defence responses were initiated inside chloroplasts. Genome-wide transcriptional profile analyses were performed as well and the results proved that there were only statistically significant changes in the transcript expression of light-grown ACSC treated with 0.5 µM RB and 500 µM H2O2, but not with IC nor with MV. Functional enrichment analyses revealed that GO/Biological process terms associated with defence responses were common in the treatments with 0.5 µM RB and 500 µM H2O2; however, resistance response to pathogen and PCD terms were only significantly over-represented in the RB treatment. Moreover, the analysis of the up-regulated transcripts in ACSC treated with 0.5 µM RB brought out that both specific markers for singlet oxygen from the conditional fluorescence (flu) mutant of Arabidopsis and transcripts with a key role in hormone-activated PCD (i.e. ethylene and jasmonic acid) were present, although there was no evidence for the up-regulation of EDS1 encoding the ENHANCED DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY PROTEIN 1. Finally, a co-regulation analysis proved that ACSC treated with 0.5 µM RB exhibited higher correlation with the flu family mutants than with other singlet oxygen producer mutants of Arabidopsis or wild-type plants of Arabidopsis subjected to high light treatments, where singlet oxygen was produced in photosystem II and an acclimatory response was activated instead of PCD. 18 Samples total. Six Samples are controls, 3 Samples each treated with Rose Bengal, Hydrogen Peroxide, Methyl Violet, and Indigo Carmine.							
Term Source Name	ArrayExpress	EFO						
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl						
Person Last Name	GARCIA	Gutiérrez	González-Pérez	García-García	Lorenzo	Revuelta	McCabe	Arellano
Person First Name	FRANCISCO	Jorge	Sergio	Francisco	Oscar	José	Paul	Juan
Person Mid Initials	GARCIA					L	F	B
Person Email	fgarcia@cipf.es							
Person Affiliation	CIPF							
Person Address	Bionformatics and Genomics, CIPF, Av Autopista del Saler, 16, Valencia, Spain							
Person Roles	submitter							
Protocol Name	P-GSE43551-1	P-GSE43551-5	P-GSE43551-6	P-GSE43551-2	P-GSE43551-3	P-GSE43551-4	P-GSE43551-7	
Protocol Description	Data was standardized from R  using the affy Bioconductor package. Methods: Robust Multi-array Average and quantile normalization. ID_REF =  VALUE = RMA signal intensity	Biotin-labelled cRNA was produced by in vitro transcription using GeneChip(r) 3' IVT Express Kit. The biotin-labelled cRNA was degraded by alkaline digestion and used for hybridization with ATH1 arrays.	Technical steps as target hybridization, washing and staining of the arrays were performed sequentially as described in the Affymetrix GeneChip expression analysis technical manual using the Affymetrix once-cycle target labelling and control reagents, an Affymetrix GeneChip hybridization oven 640, and Affymetrix Fluidics Station 450	An incubation of 30 min at high light or 1-h at dark were selected as the optimum time to monitor the changes in the transcription profile in the microarray experiments.	Arabidopsis cell suspension culture was maintained in 200 mL of liquid growth medium (Jouannea and Peaudlen, 1967; Axelos et al., 1992) by gentle agitation at 120 rpm at 24 degrees C under continuous illumination (50 microE/m2/s) in an incubator shaker. Cells were sub-cultured with a 1/20 dilution factor every 7 days.	Total RNA was extracted with the acid guanidine isothiocyanate-phenol-chloroform method using Trizol reagent. Total RNA was treated with TURBO DNase to eliminate traces of contaminating genomic DNA.	Microarrays were scanned using Affymetrix GenChip Scanner 3000 7G.	
Protocol Type	normalization data transformation protocol	labelling protocol	hybridization protocol	sample treatment protocol	growth protocol	nucleic acid extraction protocol	array scanning protocol	
Publication Author List	Gutiérrez J, González-Pérez S, García-García F, Lorenzo O, Revuelta JL, McCabe PF, Arellano JB							
Publication Title	Programmed cell death activated by Rose Bengal in Arabidopsis thaliana cell suspension cultures requires functional chloroplasts							
Publication DOI	10.1093/jxb/eru151							
PubMed ID	24723397							
Experimental Factor Name	compound	dose						
Experimental Factor Type	compound	dose						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE43551							
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2014-03-13							
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2013-01-16							
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2014-03-15							
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array							
SDRF File	E-GEOD-43551.sdrf.txt							
