Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-56480
MAGE-TAB Version	1.1						
Public Release Date	2014-04-04
Investigation Title	Developmental stage specificity of transcriptional, biochemical and CO2 efflux responses of leaf dark respiration to growth of Arabidopsis thaliana at elevated [CO2]						
Comment[Submitted Name]	Developmental stage specificity of transcriptional, biochemical and CO2 efflux responses of leaf dark respiration to growth of Arabidopsis thaliana at elevated [CO2]
Experiment Description	Plant respiration responses to elevated growth [CO2] are key uncertainties in predicting future crop and ecosystem function. In particular, the effects of elevated growth [CO2] on respiration over leaf development are poorly understood. This study tested the prediction that, due to greater whole-plant photoassimilate availability and growth, elevated [CO2] induces transcriptional reprogramming and a stimulation of nighttime respiration in leaf primordia, expanding leaves, and mature leaves of Arabidopsis thaliana. In primordia, elevated [CO2] altered transcript abundance, but not for genes encoding respiratory proteins. In expanding leaves, elevated [CO2] induced greater glucose content and transcript abundance for some respiratory genes, but did not alter respiratory CO2 efflux. In mature leaves, elevated [CO2] led to greater glucose, sucrose and starch content, plus greater transcript abundance for many components of the respiratory pathway, and greater respiratory CO2 efflux. Therefore, growth at elevated [CO2] stimulated dark respiration only after leaves transitioned from carbon sinks into carbon sources. This coincided with greater photoassimilate production by mature leaves under elevated [CO2] and peak respiratory transcriptional responses. It remains to be determined if biochemical and transcriptional responses to elevated [CO2] in primordial and expanding leaves are essential prerequisites for subsequent alterations of respiratory metabolism in mature leaves. Arabidopsis plants were grown in either ambient (370 ppm) or elevated (750 ppm) CO2. Leaf number 10 was harvested when it was a primordia, expanding, or mature in each of the CO2 treatments.						
Term Source Name	ArrayExpress	EFO
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl					
Person Last Name	Markelz	Markelz	Leakey				
Person First Name	Robert	R	Andrew				
Person Mid Initials	John Cody	J	D				
Person Email	geo@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov						
Person Affiliation	University of Illinois						
Person Address	Plant Biology, University of Illinois, 1206 W Gregory Dr, Urbana, IL, USA						
Person Roles	submitter						
Protocol Name	P-GSE56480-1	P-GSE56480-5	P-GSE56480-6	P-GSE56480-2	P-GSE56480-3	P-GSE56480-4	P-GSE56480-7
Protocol Description	The data were analyzed using JMP Genomics Version 5.1 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary NC, USA) using the Basic Expression Workflow Option with the median intensity normalization method option. Probesets not called present in at least 3 biological replicates for each treatment combination were considered insufficiently replicated and were dropped,  leaving 12826 remaining for the analysis. ID_REF =  VALUE = Log2 values based on median intensity normalization	Labeling was performed by the Keck Center University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Following manufacturers protocols using the 3' IVT Express Kit User Manual	Labeling was performed by the Keck Center University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Following manufacturers protocols using the 3' IVT Express Kit User Manual	After 7 days in the growth chambers, plants were randomized between two identical Conviron growth chambers retrofitted for CO2 control. Ambient CO2 was kept at a constant 370 ppm while elevated CO2 was maintained at a constant 750 ppm.	Arabidopsis thaliana (Col) seeds were soaked in deionized water for 15 min and planted directly on LC1 sunshine mix in 216 cm^2 pots. Planted pots were cold treated in the dark at 4 degrees C for 48 hr prior to being placed into growth chambers with 10/14 day/night cycle with 21/18 degrees C temperature cycle and 300 micromol per meter squared per second photosynthetically active radiation. Plants were kept at 370 ppm CO2 during this period.	Whole plants were harvested into liquid nitrogen followed by penetration of RNA-Later ICE to allow for leaf primordia to be dissected. 20 individual plants per biological replicate were harvested for the primorida developmental timepoint. Expanding and mature leaves were harvested in full and frozen in liquid nitrogen. All tissue was stored at -80 C, ground frozen and RNA was s isolated using a Spectra Plant RNA Isolation Kit (Sigma) following manufacturers instructions.	Wash and Scanning were performed by the Keck Center University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Following manufacturers protocols using the Expression Wash, Stain, Scan User Manual for Cartridge Arrays Manual on an Affymetrix model 3000 scanner
Protocol Type	normalization data transformation protocol	labelling protocol	hybridization protocol	sample treatment protocol	growth protocol	nucleic acid extraction protocol	array scanning protocol
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE56480						
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2014-04-04						
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2014-04-03						
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2014-04-04						
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
SDRF File	E-GEOD-56480.sdrf.txt
