Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidosis Ler and Cvi ecotypes and 17 derived inbred recombinant lines subjected to micro-landscape fragmentation and two levels of disturbance revealing functional landscape genomics reveals genetic changes in fixed and migrating experimental populations.									
Comment[Submitted Name]	Functional landscape genomics reveals genetic changes in fixed and migrating experimental populations.									
Experimental Design	growth_condition_design	individual_genetic_characteristics_design	in_vivo_design	comparative_genome_hybridization_design	transcription profiling by array					
Experimental Design Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology			mo	EFO					
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array									
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis Ler and Cvi ecotypes and 17 derived recombinant inbred lines after micro-landscape fragmentation and landscape disturbance									
Comment[SecondaryAccession]										
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2010-05-12									
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	5									
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-MTAB-107									
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-10-15 23:00:38 Last Changed Rev: 14677									
Experimental Factor Name	LANDSCAPE FRAGMENTATION	LANDSCAPE DISTURBANCE	STRAIN	ORGANISM PART						
Experimental Factor Type	environmental_history	growth_condition	strain_or_line	organism_part						
Experimental Factor Term Source REF										
Person Last Name	Heichinger									
Person First Name	Christian									
Person Mid Initials										
Person Email	christian.heichinger@rockefeller.edu									
Person Phone	+41-(0)44-634 8275									
Person Fax										
Person Address	Institute of Plant Biology, Zollikerstrasse 107, CH-8008 Zurich									
Person Affiliation	Laboratory of Yeast Genetics and Cell Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA									
Person Roles	submitter									
Person Roles Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology									
Quality Control Type	biological_replicate									
Quality Control Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology									
Replicate Type										
Replicate Term Source REF										
Normalization Type										
Normalization Term Source REF										
Date of Experiment										
Public Release Date	2010-05-12									
PubMed ID	20956303									
Publication DOI	10.1073/pnas.1010846107									
Publication Author List	Sima Fakheran, Cloé Paul-Victor, Christian Heichinger, Bernhard Schmid, Ueli Grossniklaus, Lindsay A Turnbull									
Publication Title	Adaptation and extinction in experimentally fragmented landscapes									
Publication Status	published									
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO									
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796									
Experiment Description	We carried out a five-generation selection experiment in which two Arabidopsis accessions (Ler and Cvi) and 17 Recombinant Inbred Lines (RILs) derived from them were subjected in 24 replicated populations to four levels of micro-landscape fragmentation and two levels of disturbance, factorially crossed with each other to yield 8 experimental selection regimes.  We used 19 lines (including the two parental Ler and Cvi) in generation 1 of our experiment, nine of which contained the erecta mutation and ten of which did not. Lines expressing the erecta mutation are short and compact and are likely to disperse seeds over shorter distances. Both the non-erecta and the erecta lines spanned the full available range of seed sizes from the original 162 RILs in the collection. We set up 24 experimental landscapes consisting of 2, 4, 8, or 16 patches where the total area was constrained to be equal. Plants that germinated outside the designated suitable patches were removed. In half of the landscapes – which we termed static – the top 2-3 mm of seeds and soil were removed from the surface of the suitable patches after 8 weeks of growth and reproduction. In the other half of the landscapes – which we termed dynamic – a number of Petri dishes, equivalent in size and number to the existing suitable patches, were distributed around the landscape at random, to catch dispersing seeds. The seeds collected by these two methods were cold-treated for one week while all patches were replenished with fresh substrate. Seeds were then returned to the surface of the new patches at the beginning of the next generation. Thus, in dynamic landscapes, seeds must disperse to have any chance of entering the next generation, while in static landscapes, only seeds that do not disperse have any chance of further propagation. After five generations of such selection, a single pod from approximately 70 individuals from each landscape was removed. Single individuals derived from such pods were reared under standardized conditions to measure several phenotypic characters, such as seed mass, height, presence of the erecta mutation, flowering time etc. Clear phenotypic differences are apparent between the different landscapes. However, we have no information as to the underlying genes, which might have been selected or the epigenetic modifications that might have occurred.  Material for DNA extraction from each population (? 50 plants/population) was collected for subsequent genetic analyses. The allele frequencies of Ler and Cvi alleles was determined at the genome-wide level using ATH1 Affymetrix GeneChips® (each in quadruplicate = 8 parental microarrays). 26638 single feature polymorphisms (SFPs) between these two accessions could be detected. The relative contribution of Ler and Cvi alleles in a population at each locus, for which a single feature polymorphism can be detected, was assessed. We then analyzed the DNA isolated from the experimental populations (24 landscapes of generation 5 = 24 microarrays & original populations in triplicate = 3 microarrays) and determine the relative contributions of Ler and Cvi alleles for the 26638 identified SFPs (i.e. allele frequency shifts).									
Protocol Name	P-MTAB-4190	P-MTAB-4191	P-MTAB-4192	P-MTAB-4193	P-MTAB-4194	P-MTAB-4197				
Protocol Type	grow	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	bioassay_data_transformation				
Protocol Description	Plants were grown under standard greenhouse conditions.	Two Arabidopsis accessions (Ler and Cvi) and 17 Recombinant Inbred Lines (RILs) derived from them were subjected in 24 replicated populations to four levels of micro-landscape fragmentation and two levels of disturbance, factorially crossed with each other to yield 8 experimental selection regimes. We set up 24 experimental landscapes consisting of 2, 4, 8, or 16 patches where the total area was constrained to be equal. Plants that germinated outside the designated suitable patches were removed. In half of the landscapes – which we termed static – the top 2-3 mm of seeds and soil were removed from the surface of the suitable patches after 8 weeks of growth and reproduction. In the other half of the landscapes – which we termed dynamic – a number of Petri dishes, equivalent in size and number to the existing suitable patches, were distributed around the landscape at random, to catch dispersing seeds. The seeds collected by these two methods were cold-treated for one week while all patches were replenished with fresh substrate. Seeds were then returned to the surface of the new patches at the beginning of the next generation. Thus, in dynamic landscapes, seeds must disperse to have any chance of entering the next generation, while in static landscapes, only seeds that do not disperse have any chance of further propagation. After five generations of such selection, a single pod from approximately 70 individuals from each landscape was removed. Single individuals derived from such pods were reared under standardized conditions to measure several phenotypic characters, such as seed mass, height, presence of the erecta mutation, flowering time etc.	Flowers for DNA extraction from each population (? 50 plants/population) and leaves from the parental accessions Cvi and Ler, were collected for DNA extraction. The frozen material (-80C) was ground and  the resulting powder was used in the Qiagen DNA easy kit (#69104).  The DNA was re-suspended in 100ul water for labelling.	The Invitrogen BioPrime DNA labeling system (#18094-011) was used. The total labeling reaction volume is 150ul. To ~30ul (300ng) Plant DNA add 60ul 2.5X random primers, and make up to 132ul dH2O. Denature at > 95C for 5-10minutes, then cool on ice. Add 15ul 10X dNTPs mix with Biotin dCTP. Add 3ul Klenow polymerase enzyme. Incubate overnight @ 25C (room temp).  This results in small labeled products of about 50bp. Purify by sodium ethanol precipitation. Add 15ul 3M NaOAc, 400ul cold 100% Ethanol, spin, remove supernatant, and wash with 500ul cold  75% EtOH. Resuspend in 100ul water. Use 5ul to check yield and quality on a gel.  All bands should be close to the same intensity.  Dilute samples if necessary so that each reaction has the same amount of labeled product.	The labeled DNA is hybridized the same as labeled cRNA in standard hybridization protocols for gene expression to Affymetrix ATH1 Affymetrix GeneChips®. Mix 10ug of labeled DNA with 3.3ul Control Oligo B2 (3nM), 10ul Eukaryotic Hybridization Controls (optional), 2ul Herring Sperm DNA (10mg/ml), 2ul Acetylated BSA (50mg/ml), 110ul 2X hybridization buffer. Make up with dH2O to a Final Volume ~225ul. Heat Denature >95C for 5 minutes, then cool on ice.  After 10 minute pre-hybridization of arrays with 1X hybridization buffer at 45C, replace with 200ul denatured hybridization cocktail (above). Hybridize overnight @ 45C with rotation 60rpm. Use standard eukaryotic wash and double antibody stain. 	To identify single feature polymorphisms (SFPs) a matrix of spatially corrected normalized PM data which contains 8 columns (1 for each array) and 202882 rows (one for each feature) was created. The means and sum of squared deviations were calculated for each feature. The SAM d-statistic was calculated, which is similar to a t-statistic except that a constant (s0) was added to the denominator. This guards against large d-statistics for small mean differences between genotypes when the error is also small. To estimate the False Discovery Rate (FDR) the null distribution of the ordered d-statistic was determined. Labels on the 4 Cvi and 4 Ler arrays were shuffled as if the experiment was performed without keeping track of the genotypes. In each permutation, d-statistics were calculated for all features. 70 permutations were used to estimate the FDR. The d-statistics were sorted for each permutation and averaged to estimate the null distribution. The assumption here was that the ordered d-statistics for each feature come from the same ordered distribution. The FDR was then calculated at different thresholds by counting the number or ordered d-statistics greater than a threshold in both the original data and in each permuted data set. The average number of d-statistics that exceed a threshold among the permuted data sets was an estimate of the number of false positives. The false discovery rate was this number divided by the number of SFPs identified (d-statistics exceeding a threshold) in the original data and was chosen to be below 5% for identification of SFPs. Subsequently SFPs were used for bulk segregant analysis to identify allele frequency shifts between generations 1 and 5 of the experimental landscapes. The first step of bulk segregant mapping is to scale each SFP so that the difference between the two parental genotypes (Cvi and Ler) is 1 and the mean is 0. With each SFP ont eh same scale, homozygous Cvi genotypes = 0.5, heterozygous = 0, and Ler = -0.5. The allele frequency of any single SFP is noisy however an accurate estimate can be made by considering multiple SFPs along a region. We were interested in deviations from equal proportions of Cvi and Ler genotypes in a pool, an allele frequency of 0 on our scale. To identify these regions, the genotype of the Ler pool is subtracted from the Cvi pool. The resulting vector of allele frequency differences for each chromosome is then smoothed by loess. To identify single feature polymorphisms (SFPs) a matrix of spatially corrected normalized PM data which contains 8 columns (1 for each array) and 202882 rows (one for each feature) was created. The means and sum of squared deviations were calculated for each feature. The SAM d-statistic was calculated, which is similar to a t-statistic except that a constant (s0) was added to the denominator. This guards against large d-statistics for small mean differences between genotypes when the error is also small. To estimate the False Discovery Rate (FDR) the null distribution of the ordered d-statistic was determined. Labels on the 4 Cvi and 4 Ler arrays were shuffled as if the experiment was performed without keeping track of the genotypes. In each permutation, d-statistics were calculated for all features. 70 permutations were used to estimate the FDR. The d-statistics were sorted for each permutation and averaged to estimate the null distribution. The assumption here was that the ordered d-statistics for each feature come from the same ordered distribution. The FDR was then calculated at different thresholds by counting the number or ordered d-statistics greater than a threshold in both the original data and in each permuted data set. The average number of d-statistics that exceed a threshold among the permuted data sets was an estimate of the number of false positives. The false discovery rate was this number divided by the number of SFPs identified (d-statistics exceeding a threshold) in the original data and was chosen to be below 5% for identification of SFPs. Subsequently SFPs were used for bulk segregant analysis to identify allele frequency shifts between generations 1 and 5 of the experimental landscapes. The first step of bulk segregant mapping is to scale each SFP so that the difference between the two parental genotypes (Cvi and Ler) is 1 and the mean is 0. With each SFP ont eh same scale, homozygous Cvi genotypes = 0.5, heterozygous = 0, and Ler = -0.5. The allele frequency of any single SFP is noisy however an accurate estimate can be made by considering multiple SFPs along a region. We were interested in deviations from equal proportions of Cvi and Ler genotypes in a pool, an allele frequency of 0 on our scale. To identify these regions, the genotype of the Ler pool is subtracted from the Cvi pool. The resulting vector of allele frequency differences for each chromosome is then smoothed by loess. Analysis scripts for bulk segregant analysis are available here (http://naturalvariation.org/methods).  Analysis scripts were adapted as follows. Since the parental accessions were Ler and Cvi and not Col, which is the basis of the targets located on the ATH1 Affymetrix Genechips®, two-tailed modified t-tests were performed instead of one-tailed. To minimize the possibility that identified SFPs represent duplications between Cvi and Ler accessions, potential SFP duplications were mapped using two-tailed t-test on previously published microarray data for Col/Ler (1382 duplications) and Col/Cvi (754 duplications) at the threshold used for mapping SFPs in Cvi/Ler accessions. Of these duplications 1937 were unique and 1054 SFP markers matched in the Cvi/Ler population and were thus removed from further analysis leaving a total of 26638 SFP markers for bulk segregant analysis.				
Protocol Parameters										
Protocol Hardware										
Protocol Software										
Protocol Contact										
Protocol Term Source REF						The MGED Ontology				
SDRF File	E-MTAB-107.sdrf.txt									
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		po	Plant Ontology	NCI_thesaurus	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	The MGED Ontology	mo	EFO
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://www.plantontology.org	http://www.plantontology.org/	ncithesaurus.obo.alt	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/
Term Source Version										
