Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-15601							
Public Release Date	2009-06-14							
Investigation Title	Uncovering the Arabidopsis thaliana nectary transcriptome							
Comment[Submitted Name]	Uncovering the Arabidopsis thaliana nectary transcriptome							
Experiment Description	Many flowering plants attract pollinators by offering a reward of floral nectar. Remarkably, the molecular events involved in the development of nectaries, the organs that produce nectar, as well as the synthesis and secretion of nectar itself, are poorly understood. Indeed, to date, no genes have been shown to directly affect the de novo production or quality of floral nectar. To address this gap in knowledge, the ATH1 Affymetrix GeneChip array was used to systematically investigate the Arabidopsis nectary transcriptome to identify genes and pathways potentially involved in nectar production. In this study, we identified a large number of genes differentially expressed between secretory lateral nectaries and non-secretory median nectary tissues, as well as between mature lateral nectaries (post-anthessis) and immature lateral nectary tissue (pre-anthesis). Three different types of RNA samples were prepared from Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia-0 nectaries: mature lateral nectaries (MLN; Stage 14-15 flowers), immature lateral nectaries (ILN, Stage 11-12 flowers), and mature median nectaries (MMN, Stage 14-15 flowers) [developmental stages defined by (Smyth et al., 1990)]. MLN are secretory tissues, whereas, ILN and MMN are pre-secretory and nonsecretory tissues, respectively. All nectary tissues were separately dissected by hand from the flowers of primary inflorescences of ca. 30-35 day-old plants.  All plants were grown in soil with a 16h light/8h dark light regimen. Due to the small size of nectaries, dissections took place over several days from 4-8 hours after dawn (h.a.d.).							
Date of Experiment								
Term Source Name	EFO							
Term Source Version								
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl							
Person Last Name	Carter	Kram	Xu	Carter				
Person First Name	Clay	Brian	Wayne	Clay				
Person Mid Initials	J	W	W	J				
Person Email	cjcarter@d.umn.edu							
Person Affiliation	University of Minnesota Duluth							
Person Phone	218-726-7347							
Person Fax								
Person Address	Biology, University of Minnesota Duluth, 1035 Kirby Dr, Duluth, MN, USA							
Person Roles	submitter							
Person Roles Term Source REF								
Person Roles Term Accession Number								
Normalization Type								
Normalization Term Accession Number								
Normalization Term Source REF								
Replicate Type								
Replicate Term Accession Number								
Replicate Term Source REF								
Experimental Design								
Experimental Design Term Accession Number								
Experimental Design Term Source REF								
Quality Control Type								
Quality Control Term Accession Number								
Quality Control Term Source REF								
Protocol Name	P-GSE15601-1	P-GSE15601-6	P-GSE15601-3	P-GSE15601-8	P-GSE15601-7	P-GSE15601-2	P-GSE15601-4	P-GSE15601-5
Protocol Description	ID_REF = <br>VALUE = RMA signal intensity, linear scale	Hybridization was performed according to the recommended Affymetrix protocols at the University of Minnesota Microarray facility.	Plants were grown in individual pots on a peat-based growth medium with vermiculite and perlite (Pro-Mix BX; Premier Horticulture, Rivière-du-Loup, Quebec, Canada). All plant growth was performed in Percival AR66LX environmental chambers with settings of: 16 hr day/8hr night cycle, photosynthetic photon flux of 150 µmol m-2 s-1, 50% humidity and temperature of 21°C.  All nectary tissues were separately dissected by hand from the flowers of primary inflorescences of ca. 30-35 day-old plants. Due to the small size of nectaries, dissections took place over several days from 4-8 hours after dawn (h.a.d.). Isolated nectaries were pooled in RNAlater™ solution (Ambion, Austin, TX) on ice, and stored at +4°C prior to RNA extraction. Up to two nectaries were collected per flower, with approximately 250-300 nectaries being processed as a single RNA sample.	The probe level signals were quantile-normalized and summarized using RMA algorithm by using the Expressionist® (Genedata, Basel, Switzerland) Refiner module.  Gene expression values were further linear scaled up to a media of 100 in the Expressionist® (Genedata, Basel, Switzerland) Analyst module.	GeneChips were scanned using a GeneChip 3000 scanner at the University of Minnesota Microarray Facility	N/A	RNA was extracted from floral nectariferous tissue by mechanical disruption, with a microcentrifuge pestle, and using the RNAqueous®-Micro micro scale RNA isolation kit (Ambion, Austin, TX) with Plant RNA Isolation Aid (Ambion, Austin, TX). Denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis (Applied Biosystems, 2008) and UV spectrophotometry were used to assess RNA quality for all samples.	RNA was processed using the MessageAmp™ II-Biotin Enhanced Kit (Ambion, Austin, TX) for a single round of RNA amplification as described by the manufacturer. Briefly, 250-500 ng of total RNA (500 ng from lateral nectaries; 250 ng from median nectaries due to extremely small size) was used in a reverse transcription reaction to generate first-strand cDNA. Following second-strand synthesis, double-stranded cDNA was used in an in vitro transcription (IVT) reaction to generate biotin-labeled, amplified RNA (aRNA). aRNA size distribution was evaluated by conventional denaturing agarose gel analysis according to manufacturer’s instructions (Ambion, Austin, TX). An aRNA fragmentation reaction, employing metal-induced hydrolysis, was used to fragment aRNA as described by the manufacturer (Ambion, Austin, TX).
Protocol Software								
Protocol Hardware								
Protocol Contact								
Protocol Type	bioassay_data_transformation	hybridization	grow	feature_extraction	image_aquisition	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling
Protocol Term Source REF								
Protocol Term Accession Number								
Experimental Factor Name	DEVELOPMENTAL STAGE	ORGANISM PART						
Experimental Factor Type	developmental_stage	organism_part						
Experimental Factor Term Source REF								
Experimental Factor Term Accession Number								
Publication Title	Uncovering the Arabidopsis thaliana nectary transcriptome: investigation of differential gene expression in floral nectariferous tissues.							
Publication Author List	Kram BW, Xu WW, Carter CJ.							
PubMed ID	19604393							
Publication DOI	10.1186/1471-2229-9-92							
Publication Status	published							
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO							
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796							
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE15601							
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2009-08-17							
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis floral nectaries							
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array							
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2009-06-13							
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2009-04-07							
SDRF File	E-GEOD-15601.sdrf.txt							
