Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis mutants CHS-silenced type (ECG) and the anthocyanin-producing revertants (15B)	
Comment[Submitted Name]	Jordan: Genes affected by hog1 alleviation of CHS silencing	
Experimental Design	strain_or_line_design	transcription profiling by array	
Experimental Design Term Source REF	mo	EFO	
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]		
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3	
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-NASC-36	
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-11 19:13:49 Last Changed Rev: 13058	
Experimental Factor Name	strain_or_line	genetic_modification	
Experimental Factor Type	strain_or_line	genetic_modification	
Experimental Factor Term Source REF	
Person Last Name	unknown	Jordan	
Person First Name	unknown	Nick	
Person Mid Initials	
Person Email		ndj20@cam.ac.uk	
Person Phone	+44 (0)115 951 3091	01223 333959	
Person Fax	+44 (0)115 951 3297	01223 333992	
Person Address	Plant Science Division, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonnington Campus, Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK	University of Cambridge Department of Genetics Downing Street Cambridge CB2 3EH UK 	
Person Affiliation		University of Cambridge	
Person Roles		biosource_provider;investigator;submitter	
Person Roles Term Source REF		mo	
Quality Control Type	
Quality Control Term Source REF	
Replicate Type	
Replicate Term Source REF	
Normalization Type	
Normalization Term Source REF	
Date of Experiment	
Public Release Date	
PubMed ID	
Publication DOI	
Publication Author List	
Publication Title	
Publication Status	
Publication Status Term Source REF	
Experiment Description	As part of an investigation into mechanisms of HDG silencing in Arabidopsis, we have produced transgenic plants containing extra copies of the chalcone synthase (CHS) gene. The CHS gene mediates an early step in the biosynthesis of the purple pigment anthocyanin. The insertion of extra copies of CHS in Arabidopsis caused the gene to be silenced in some plants.  Seeds harvested from these CHS-silenced plants were mutated by treatment with ems. The progeny of these seeds were screened for "revertants" in which the effects of CHS silencing was alleviated and plants were able to produce anthocyanin. These revertants were found to contain a single recessive mutation; the trait has been termed hog1 (for homology dependant gene silencing 1). Our previous experiment used the Affymetrix 8200 chip to make comparisons between gene expression in the two genetic variants:  the CHS-silenced type (ECG) and the anthocyanin-producing revertants (15B). Results showed that there were over 100 genes with at least a 10-fold increase or decrease in expression. However, the variation between 2 reps of each genetic variant was high. We would now like to carry out  a modified version of this experiment using the 25K Affymetrix chip. It is intended to increase the number of reps to 4, and take samples at an earlier stage than previously in order to decrease the effect of developmental spread. To reduce the effects of interplant variability, samples will be generated from total plant tissue from a pool of 10 plants at GS 1.04. RNA will be purified using RNeasy kits from Qiagen.	
Protocol Name	NASCGrowProt:466	NASCGrowProt:467	NASCGrowProt:469	NASCGrowProt:465	NASCGrowProt:468	NASCGrowProt:471	NASCGrowProt:472	NASCGrowProt:470	NASCExtractProtocol:1	NASCLabelProtocol:1	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-EukGE-WS2v4	Affymetrix:Protocol:Percentile	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat	
Protocol Type									nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation	
Protocol Description	Plants were grown in growth rooms at ambient atmosphere and humidity and a temperature of 22 C. The photoperiod was 18 hr. The medium was MS in 0.7% agar, supplemented with 1% sucrose. Stratification was carried out at 4C for 3 days. Plants were grown to growth stage 1.04 (Boyes key). 10 plants were pooled for each RNA extract to reduce variation. Total tissue was harvested and used for RNA extraction.	Plants were grown in growth rooms at ambient atmosphere and humidity and a temperature of 22 C. The photoperiod was 18 hr. The medium was MS in 0.7% agar, supplemented with 1% sucrose. Stratification was carried out at 4C for 3 days. Plants were grown to growth stage 1.04 (Boyes key). 10 plants were pooled for each RNA extract to reduce variation. Total tissue was harvested and used for RNA extraction.	Plants were grown in growth rooms at ambient atmosphere and humidity and a temperature of 22 C. The photoperiod was 18 hr. The medium was MS in 0.7% agar, supplemented with 1% sucrose. Stratification was carried out at 4C for 3 days. Plants were grown to growth stage 1.04 (Boyes key). 10 plants were pooled for each RNA extract to reduce variation. Total tissue was harvested and used for RNA extraction.	Plants were grown in growth rooms at ambient atmosphere and humidity and a temperature of 22 C. The photoperiod was 18 hr. The medium was MS in 0.7% agar, supplemented with 1% sucrose. Stratification was carried out at 4C for 3 days. Plants were grown to growth stage 1.04 (Boyes key). 10 plants were pooled for each RNA extract to reduce variation. Total tissue was harvested and used for RNA extraction.	Plants were grown in growth rooms at ambient atmosphere and humidity and a temperature of 22 C. The photoperiod was 18 hr. The medium was MS in 0.7% agar, supplemented with 1% sucrose. Stratification was carried out at 4C for 3 days. Plants were grown to growth stage 1.04 (Boyes key). 10 plants were pooled for each RNA extract to reduce variation. Total tissue was harvested and used for RNA extraction.	Plants were grown in growth rooms at ambient atmosphere and humidity and a temperature of 22 C. The photoperiod was 18 hr. The medium was MS in 0.7% agar, supplemented with 1% sucrose. Stratification was carried out at 4C for 3 days. Plants were grown to growth stage 1.04 (Boyes key). 10 plants were pooled for each RNA extract to reduce variation. Total tissue was harvested and used for RNA extraction.	Plants were grown in growth rooms at ambient atmosphere and humidity and a temperature of 22 C. The photoperiod was 18 hr. The medium was MS in 0.7% agar, supplemented with 1% sucrose. Stratification was carried out at 4C for 3 days. Plants were grown to growth stage 1.04 (Boyes key). 10 plants were pooled for each RNA extract to reduce variation. Total tissue was harvested and used for RNA extraction.	Plants were grown in growth rooms at ambient atmosphere and humidity and a temperature of 22 C. The photoperiod was 18 hr. The medium was MS in 0.7% agar, supplemented with 1% sucrose. Stratification was carried out at 4C for 3 days. Plants were grown to growth stage 1.04 (Boyes key). 10 plants were pooled for each RNA extract to reduce variation. Total tissue was harvested and used for RNA extraction.	Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol 	RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70°C for 10 minutes.  First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ß-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.	Title: Fluidics Station Protocol. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL Analysis (Percentile). Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 	
Protocol Parameters	location;Lighting;Temperature;Humidity;Atmosphere;Stratification;Nutrients;Treatment;Medium;	Nutrients;Treatment;Stratification;Temperature;Humidity;Medium;Lighting;Atmosphere;location;	Stratification;Nutrients;Treatment;Medium;Lighting;Temperature;Humidity;Atmosphere;location;	Humidity;Temperature;location;Atmosphere;Treatment;Nutrients;Lighting;Medium;Stratification;	Nutrients;Stratification;Temperature;Lighting;Medium;Treatment;location;Atmosphere;Humidity;	location;Atmosphere;Temperature;Humidity;Medium;Lighting;Nutrients;Treatment;Stratification;	Atmosphere;location;Temperature;Humidity;Lighting;Medium;Treatment;Nutrients;Stratification;	Stratification;Treatment;Nutrients;Lighting;Medium;Humidity;Temperature;location;Atmosphere;	
Protocol Hardware	
Protocol Software											MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	
Protocol Contact	
Protocol Term Source REF													The MGED Ontology	
SDRF File	E-NASC-36.sdrf.txt	
Term Source Name	The MGED Ontology		nasc	ncbitax	ArrayExpress	mo	EFO	The MGED Ontology	
Term Source File	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php		http://arabidopsis.info/catalogue.html	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/taxonomyhome.html	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version									
