Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis root cell-types after treatment with salt						
Comment[Submitted Name]	Expression analysis of root cell-types after treatment with salt						
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array					
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO					
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis root cells after treatment with NaCl						
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-15						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE7641						
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4						
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-7641						
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-07 20:51:53 Last Changed Rev: 13058						
Experimental Factor Name	growth condition	cell type					
Experimental Factor Type	growth condition	cell type					
Experimental Factor Term Source REF							
Person Last Name	Dinneny						
Person First Name	Jose Ramon						
Person Mid Initials							
Person Email	jdinneny@duke.edu						
Person Phone							
Person Fax							
Person Address	"Philip N. Benfey, Biology, Duke University, Box 90338, Durham, 27708, USA"						
Person Affiliation	Duke University						
Person Roles	submitter						
Person Roles Term Source REF							
Date of Experiment							
Public Release Date	2008-06-15						
PubMed ID	18436742						
Publication DOI	10.1126/science.1153795						
Publication Author List	"Dinneny JR, Long TA, Wang JY, Jung JW, Mace D, Pointer S, Barron C, Brady SM, Schiefelbein J, Benfey PN"						
Publication Title	Cell Identity Mediates the Response of Arabidopsis Roots to Abiotic Stress.						
Publication Status	published						
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO						
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796						
Experiment Description	"Cell-type specific transcriptional profiles were generated by FACS (Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting) sorting of roots that express cell-type specific GFP-reporters.  Six different GFP-reporter lines were utilized allowing us to obtain transcriptional profiles for cells in all radial zones of the root.  FACS cell populations were isolated from roots grown under standard conditions or roots that had been transfered to media supplemented with 140 mM NaCl for 1 hour. Cells are amazingly adept at integrating both external and internal cues to regulate transcriptional states.  While internal processes such as differentiation and cell-type specification are generally understood to have an important impact on gene expression, very little is known about how cells utilize these developmental cues to regulate responses to external stimuli.  Here we use the response to a well characterized environmental stress, high salinity, to obtain a global view of the role that cell identity plays in guiding transcriptional responses in the root of Arabidopsis.  Our analysis is based on three microarray data sets we have generated that explore transcriptional changes spatially among 6 cell layers and 4 longitudinal regions or temporally along 5 time points after salt treatment.  We show that the majority of the response to salt stress is cell-type specific resulting in the differential regulation of unique biological functions in subsets of cell layers.  To understand the regulatory mechanisms controlling these responses we have analyzed cis-element enrichment in the promoters of salt responsive genes and demonstrate that known stress regulatory elements likely control responses to salt occurring in multiple cell types.  Despite the extensive shift in transcriptional state that salt stress elicits, we are able to identify several biological processes that consistently define each cell layer and find that transcriptional regulators of cell-identity tend to exhibit robust cell-type specific expression.  Finally, using mutants that disrupt cell-type specification in the epidermis, we reveal cell autonomous and non-autonomous effects when cell identity is altered.  Together, these data elucidate a novel intersection between physiology and development and expand our understanding of how transcriptional states are regulated in a multi-cellular context. Experiment Overall Design: To gain a genome-scale understanding of the role that developmental processes play in regulating stimulus response, we examined the effect of salt stress on gene expression along the radial axis of the root.  Cell identity is the main variable that changes along the radial axis with the epidermis representing the outermost tissue layer and the stele representing the inner most layer.  6 different GFP reporter lines were used to isolate specific populations of cells from the Arabidopsis root using FACS sorting of protoplasted cells.  GFP-reporter lines were grown under standard conditions before protoplasting and sorting or they were transfered to media supplemented with 140mM NaCl for 1 hour before hand."						
Protocol Name	P-G7641-2	P-G7641-1	P-G7641-4	P-G7641-3	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat
Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation
Protocol Description	"Samples were prepared as in Birnbaum et al. (2005) for roots grown under standard conditions.  For salt treated samples, roots were transferred to 140 mM NaCl for 1hr before protoplasting.  Three replicates were performed per cell type, per condition.  In order to test for the effects of sorting, Col-0 roots were protoplasted after being treated for 1 hour with or without salt treatment.  Cells were passed through the FACS device with all cells being collected."	"Seeds were surface sterilized with 50% Bleach and 0.1% Tween for 5 minutes and then rinsed 3 times with sterile water.  Seeds were stratified at 4˚C for 2 days before being planted on standard media.  Standard media is 1X concentration Murashige and Skoog salt mixture (Caisson laboratories), 0.5g/L MES, 1% sucrose, 1% agar and adjusted to pH 5.7 with KOH.  Salt media is standard media with varying amounts of NaCl added.  Nylon mesh was placed on top of the solidified media and seeds were evenly placed on the mesh at a density of ~20 seeds/cm in two rows."	RNA was extracted using the RNAeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen GmbH).	Fragmented cRNA probes were prepared using the two-cycle amplification protocol by Affymetrix.	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 
Protocol Parameters							
Protocol Hardware							
Protocol Software					MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact							
Protocol Term Source REF					mo		
SDRF File	E-GEOD-7641.sdrf.txt						
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version							