Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis Cdpk6-yfp vs control to investigate the role of Cdpk6 in development				
Comment[Submitted Name]	The role of Cdpk6 in development				
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array			
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO			
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array				
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis carrying a Cdpk6-YFP or aequorin transgene				
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4				
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14				
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6147				
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6147				
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 19:04:13 Last Changed Rev: 13058				
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE				
Experimental Factor Type	genotype				
Experimental Factor Term Source REF					
Person Last Name	(NASC)				
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre				
Person Mid Initials					
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info				
Person Phone					
Person Fax					
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom				
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)				
Person Roles	submitter				
Person Roles Term Source REF					
Quality Control Type					
Quality Control Term Source REF					
Replicate Type					
Replicate Term Source REF					
Normalization Type					
Normalization Term Source REF					
Date of Experiment					
Public Release Date	2008-06-14				
PubMed ID					
Publication DOI					
Publication Author List					
Publication Title					
Publication Status					
Publication Status Term Source REF					
Experiment Description	The research programme is focussed on determining the role of CDPKs in abiotic stress response.  We chose several CDPKs for investigation, some which have been implicated in the  response to abiotic stress (Sheen 1996), others whose function is unknown.  We constructed gene fusions with YFP as a 3_in-frame fusion to investigate cellular/tissue expression; the gene-specific DNA includes 1.5kb 5'-untranslated region. Plants carrying the Cdpk6-yfp construct show a marked alteration in phenotype: the (probable)-heterozygote is small and bushy and the (probable)-homozygote shows an excess of flower primordia and insufficient leaf development.  These plants do not survive.  The expression of Cdpk6 as measured using a GUS-promoter fusion is confined to the developing flowerheads although the Cdpk6-YFP plants show more widespread expression. We have made RNA from two separate insertion lines of Cdpk6-YFP and from Col-0 plants carrying the aequorin gene all grown on selective medium.  We cannot collect homozygote seed; the seedlings germinating from seeds collected from heterzygous plants grown on selective medium will consist of both heterozygous and homozygous individuals. Experiment Overall Design: Number of plants pooled:about 40 Experiment Overall Design: Biological replicates: 2				
Protocol Name	P-G6147-1	P-G6147-3	P-G6147-2	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	unknown; Parameter location = Growth Room; Parameter Humidity = 100%; Parameter Temperature = 22 C; Parameter Lighting = 16 hrs light; Parameter Medium = S; Performer: Joy,,Boyce	Qiagen Plant RNAeasy kit; Protocol: Seedlings harvested and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and RNA extracted as described in the Qiagen RNAeasy kit. ; Protocol Type = nucleic_acid_extraction; Performer: Joy,,Boyce	Preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA; RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Â&deg;C for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.   ; Protocol Type = labeling; Performers: John,Y,Okyere, Janet,,Higgins	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters					
Protocol Hardware					
Protocol Software				MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact					
Protocol Term Source REF				mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6147.sdrf.txt				
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version					
