Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis non-homologous end joining mutants					
Comment[Submitted Name]	Mechanisms of DNA double strand break repair in Arabidopsis non-homologous end joining mutants					
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array				
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO				
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array					
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis mutant for ku80					
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14					
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6178					
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4					
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6178					
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 19:15:45 Last Changed Rev: 13058					
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE					
Experimental Factor Type	genotype					
Experimental Factor Term Source REF						
Person Last Name	(NASC)					
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre					
Person Mid Initials						
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info					
Person Phone						
Person Fax						
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom					
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)					
Person Roles	submitter					
Person Roles Term Source REF						
Quality Control Type						
Quality Control Term Source REF						
Replicate Type						
Replicate Term Source REF						
Normalization Type						
Normalization Term Source REF						
Date of Experiment						
Public Release Date	2008-06-14					
PubMed ID						
Publication DOI						
Publication Author List						
Publication Title						
Publication Status						
Publication Status Term Source REF						
Experiment Description	The proposal aims to characterise the pathways of DSB repair and recombination in Arabidopsis with the main focus of this research being the NHEJ pathway of illegitimate recombination. We will build on our expertise and resources in the field of DSB repair in plants, using the Arabidopsis NHEJ mutant atku80  which is an excellent model system for the study of DSB repair in higher eukaryotes (West et al., 2002 Plant J. 31, 517-28). Comparison of the transcriptome in NHEJ mutant and wild type plants under different experimental conditions will identify novel candidate genes involved in DNA DSB repair or damage signalling pathways.We will conduct 4 separate experiments on Arabidopsis seedlings grown on 0.5 MS media: the first will be a control consisting of Wassilewskija (WS-2) plants grown under standard conditions. In the second experiment WS plants will be exposed to the chemotherapeutic agent bleomycin (1 microgram per ml). This agent has been shown to cause both single and double strand breaks in the genome of Arabidopsis seedlings (Menke et al., 2001 Mut. Res. 493, 87-93). This agent is used in preference to  gamma irradiation, which causes high levels of oxidative damage to cellular components. These experiments will characterise for the first time the transcriptional responses of Arabidopsis cells to the specific induction of DNA strand breaks. The transcript profile will also be determined in untreated atku80 mutants. This experiment will identify the components of novel and previously characterised DNA repair pathways up regulated in the mutant background. Finally, transcript analysis of bleomycin treated atku80 mutants and comparison with untreated mutant plants and both untreated and treated WS plants will identify novel putative DSB repair genes up regulated in response to genotoxic stress in the absence of a Ku80 mediated DSB repair pathway.The results of these studies will provide new and important information which will be instrumental in identifying novel genes and pathways involved in DNA repair and genome stability in plants and help elucidate the fundamental differences that exist between animal and plant DSB repair processes. Experiment Overall Design: Number of plants pooled:20					
Protocol Name	P-G6178-4	P-G6178-1	P-G6178-3	P-G6178-2	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	bleomycin at 1mg per litre for 3 days ; Performer: Chris,,West	unknown; Parameter location = Growth Room; Parameter Humidity = 100%; Parameter Temperature = 23; Parameter Lighting = 16h 8d; Parameter Medium = MS; Parameter Nutrients = 1%; Parameter Stratification = overnight at 4 degrees; Performer: Chris,,West	Qiagen / Trizol; Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol ; Protocol Type = nucleic_acid_extraction; Performer: Chris,,West	Preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA; RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Â&deg;C for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.   ; Protocol Type = labeling; Performers: John,Y,Okyere, Janet,,Higgins	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters						
Protocol Hardware						
Protocol Software					MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact						
Protocol Term Source REF					mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6178.sdrf.txt					
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version						
