Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-20227									
Public Release Date	2010-07-09									
Investigation Title	Novel Target Genes Regulated By LEUNIG									
Comment[Submitted Name]	Novel Target Genes Regulated By LEUNIG									
Experiment Description	Regulation of homeotic gene expression is critical for proper developmental patterns in plants. The Arabidopsis thaliana floral homeotic gene AGAMOUS is regulated by LEUNIG (LUG). Mutations in LUG result in homeotic transformations of floral organ identity. LUG mutants also exhibit other defects that are independent of AG, including abnormal carpel and ovule development, reduced female and male fertility, and narrower leaves and floral organs, suggesting that LUG has a wider role in development. LUG is structurally similar to the transcription co-repressors Tup1 (S. cerevisiae) and Groucho (Drosophila), suggesting developmental pathways regulated by LUG may be controlled by a conserved eukaryotic repression mechanism.  We aim to determine novel target genes regulated by LUG using transcriptome analysis. A mutant lug-3 line has been obtained from Dr. Zhongchi Liu. This line was used in the initial studies of LUG in the Meyerowitz lab. Lug-3 is a strong allele in the Lansberg erecta background, caused by a nonsense mutation that results in early termination of the protein and is likely null. The Lug-3 mutant exhibits narrow floral organs with staminoid petals and carpelloid sepals, abnormal carpel and ovule development, reduced plant height, increased lateral branching and narrow and smaller leaves.  We proposed to use the lug-3 line in elucidating the role of LUG as a potential general regulator of transcription in Arabidopsis. mRNA populations will be isolated from wild type (Ler) and lug-3 plants that have produced inflorescence. This stage of development has been selected for several reasons. Firstly, mRNA populations from the widest range of tissue types from a single plant can be collected. Secondly, as AGAMOUS, which is involved in the regulation of floral development, is present in the Affymetrix gene chip, it will provided an excellent internal control to monitor between chips.  Results will demonstrate whether LUG is likely to have a more global role in regulating transcription, and will identify pathways under the regulation of this co-repressor-like protein. 12 samples were used in this experiment.									
Date of Experiment										
Term Source Name	EFO									
Term Source Version										
Term Source File	http://efo.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/efo/trunk/src/efoinowl/efo.owl									
Person Last Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)	Gonzalez								
Person First Name		Deyarina								
Person Mid Initials										
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info									
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)									
Person Phone	+44 (0)115 951 3237									
Person Fax	+44 (0)115 951 3297									
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, United Kingdom									
Person Roles	submitter									
Person Roles Term Source REF										
Person Roles Term Accession Number										
Normalization Type										
Normalization Term Accession Number										
Normalization Term Source REF										
Replicate Type										
Replicate Term Accession Number										
Replicate Term Source REF										
Experimental Design										
Experimental Design Term Accession Number										
Experimental Design Term Source REF										
Quality Control Type										
Quality Control Term Accession Number										
Quality Control Term Source REF										
Protocol Name	P-GSE20227-1	P-GSE20227-6	P-GSE20227-5	P-GSE20227-3	P-GSE20227-2	P-GSE20227-4	P-GSE20227-10	P-GSE20227-8	P-GSE20227-9	P-GSE20227-7
Protocol Description	ID_REF = <br>VALUE = MAS5.0-calculated signal intensity<br>ABS_CALL = the call in an absolute analysis that indicates if the transcript was present (P), absent (A), or marginal (M)<br>DETECTION P-VALUE = p-value that indicates the significance level of the detection call	Scanned according to guidelines set out by Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA.	Biotin Labelled cRNA using Affymetrix GeneChip Hybridization, Wash and Stain Kit, according to guidelines set out by Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA	Total RNA was isolated from mature rosette leaves following the Rneasy Plant Mini Kit from Qiagen. Briefly fresh tissue (pool of 20 plants) was collected manually and weighed. Immediately placed in liquid nitrogen and grinded with a mortar and pestle until a fine powder was obtained. According to the initial weight powder was decanted in liquid nitrogen-cooled Rnase-free microcentrifuge tubes (100mg of initial material per tube, ex if initial material was 500mg then powder divided in 5 tubes and in label specified they were from the same extraction). 500 microlitres of buffer RLT previously adjusted with B-mercaptoethanol was added to the samples and the tubes were placed in a vortex, vortexing for 5 minutes vigorously (Vortex Genie-2, setting 9, Scientific Industries). The lysate was pipetted directly onto a QIAshredder spin column and centrifuged for 2 minutes at 16.1g (Eppendorf Centrigue 5415D). 0.5V of ethanol was added to the cleared lysate, mixed by pipetting, applied onto the Rneasy mini column and centrifuged for 30 s at 14.7g. The column was after washed with buffer RW1 twice (first with 700 microlitres and after with 350 microlitres) and the on-column Dnase digestion performed. Dnase I solution was prepared by mixing 10 microlitres of Dnase I (1500 Kunits in 550 microlitres of Rnase-free water) with 70 microlitres of buffer RDD. 80 microlitres of Dnase I solution per sample was added onto the Rneasy silica-gel membrane and digestion was allowed for 15 minutes at 20 Celsius degrees. After the incubation time, columns were washed with 350 microlitres of buffer RW1 and centrifuged for 30 s at 14.7g. Then columns were placed into a new collection tube and washed with 500 microlitres of RPE buffer and centrifuged as before (30s, 14.7g). A final wash with 500 microlitres of RPE was carried out and samples were centrifuged for 2 minutes, at 14.7g. The columns were then placed in a new collection tube and centrifuged at 16.1g for 1 minute. Next, columns were placed into new Rnase free-collection tubes and 50 microlitres of Rnase-free water pipetted directly onto the membrane and incubated for 10 minutes before elution. To elute, samples were centrifuged for 1 minute at 14.7g. Concentration of RNA as well as the Ratio A260/A280 was determined for each sample. All the samples with a ratio near 2.0 from the same liquid-nitrogen grinded step were pool in the same collection tube and the RNA was precipitated. For the precipitation procedure, 1/10 volume of NaAC and 2 volumes of ethanol 100% were added to the pooled sample mixed by vortex and incubated overnight at -20 Celsius degrees. Next day samples were centrifuged 10 minutes at 16.1g and the pellet was washed once with ethanol 70%, centrifuged for 10 minutes at 16.1g and air-dried. Dryed pellets were resuspended in 30 microliters of Rnase-free water and concentration and Ratio A260/A280 determined. Samples with high quality were selected for the experiment.	Plants were grown in Aratrays (Arasytem, Beta Tech) under constant conditions (20°C, constant 2400 lux globe lighting). Biological insecticide Intercept 70WG was added to the water used to moisten the soil before sowing. Seeds were sown in soil, incubated at 4°C for 4 days, and placed in constant conditions. Watering was performed with tap water every two days avoiding saturation of the soil.	Labelled using protocol described in manual Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual, One-Cycle target labelling	*** The CEL file for Sample GSM507061 is truncated. A complete CEL file was requested but not provided. ***		*** The CEL file for Sample GSM507057 is truncated. A complete CEL file was requested but not provided. ***	Raw data from the microarrays was normalized at probe-level using MAS5 algorithm. The detection calls (present, marginal, absent) for each probe set was obtained using the GCOS system.
Protocol Software										
Protocol Hardware										
Protocol Contact										
Protocol Type	bioassay_data_transformation	image_acquisition	hybridization	nucleic_acid_extraction	grow	labeling	feature_extraction	feature_extraction	feature_extraction	feature_extraction
Protocol Term Source REF										
Protocol Term Accession Number										
Experimental Factor Name	organism part	genotype								
Experimental Factor Type	organism part	genotype								
Experimental Factor Term Source REF										
Experimental Factor Term Accession Number										
Publication Title										
Publication Author List										
PubMed ID										
Publication DOI										
Publication Status										
Publication Status Term Source REF										
Publication Status Term Accession Number										
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE20227									
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2010-07-07									
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis lug-3 mutant plants									
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array									
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2010-07-08									
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2010-02-08									
SDRF File	E-GEOD-20227.sdrf.txt									
