Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis adaptive response to decreases in oxygen concentration in root																								
Comment[Submitted Name]	transcript profiling of the adaptive response to decreases in oxygen concentration in the roots of Arabidopsis plants																								
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array																							
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO																							
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array																								
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis after growth at different oxygen concentrations																								
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	3																								
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-10-25																								
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE11558																								
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-11558																								
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-07-22 04:43:12 Last Changed Rev: 13058																								
Experimental Factor Name	GROWTH CONDITION	TREATMENT TIME																							
Experimental Factor Type	growth_condition	time																							
Experimental Factor Term Source REF																									
Person Last Name	van Dongen																								
Person First Name	Joost																								
Person Mid Initials	T.																								
Person Email	dongen@mpimp-golm.mpg.de																								
Person Phone																									
Person Fax																									
Person Address	AG Geigenberger, Metabolic Networks, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Am Muehlenberg 1, Potsdam, D-14476, Germany																								
Person Affiliation	Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology																								
Person Roles	submitter																								
Person Roles Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology																								
Quality Control Type																									
Quality Control Term Source REF																									
Replicate Type																									
Replicate Term Source REF																									
Normalization Type																									
Normalization Term Source REF																									
Date of Experiment																									
Public Release Date	2008-10-25																								
PubMed ID	18660497																								
Publication DOI	10.1093/aob/mcn126																								
Publication Author List	van Dongen JT, Fröhlich A, Ramírez-Aguilar SJ, Schauer N, Fernie AR, Erban A, Kopka J, Clark J, Langer A, Geigenberger P.																								
Publication Title	Transcript and metabolite profiling of the adaptive response to mild decreases in oxygen concentration in the roots of arabidopsis plants.																								
Publication Status	published																								
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO																								
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796																								
Experiment Description	- Background and Aims: Oxygen can fall to low concentrations within plant tissues, either because of environmental factors that decrease the external oxygen concentration or because the movement of oxygen through the plant tissues cannot keep pace with the rate of oxygen consumption. Recent studies document that plants can decrease their oxygen consumption in response to relative small changes in oxygen concentrations to avoid internal anoxia. The molecular mechanisms underlying this response have not been identified yet. The aim of this study was to use transcript and metabolite profiling to investigate the genomic response of Arabidopsis roots to a mild decrease in oxygen concentrations.  - Methods: Arabidopsis seedlings were grown on vertical agar plates at 21, 8, 4 and 1% (v/v) external oxygen for 0.5, 2 and 48h. Roots were analyzed for changes in transcript levels using Affymetrix whole genome DNA microarrays, and for changes in metabolite levels using routine GC-MS based metabolite profiling. Root extension rates were monitored in parallel to investigate adaptive changes in growth. - Key results: Results show that root growth was inhibited and transcript and metabolite profiles were significantly altered in response to a moderate decrease in oxygen concentrations. Low oxygen leads to a preferential up-regulation of genes that might be important to trigger adaptive responses in the plant. A small but highly specific set of genes is induced very early in response to a moderate decrease in oxygen concentrations. Genes that were down-regulated mainly encoded proteins involved in energy-consuming processes. In line with this, root extension growth was significantly decreased which will ultimately save ATP and decrease oxygen consumption. This was accompanied by a differential regulation of metabolite levels at short and long term incubation at low oxygen. - Conclusions: Results show that there are adaptive changes in root extension involving large-scale reprogramming of gene expression and metabolism when oxygen concentration is decreased in a very narrow range. Experiment Overall Design: Arabidopsis seedlings were grown on vertical agar plates and treated with various oxygen concentrations (1%, 4%, 8%, and 21% as a control), 350ppm CO2 and N2 (rest) for different time periods (0.5 hours, 2 hours and 2 days. At the end of the experiment, the roots of the seedlings were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and used for gene expression analysis.																								
Protocol Name	P-G11558-1	P-G11558-18	P-G11558-21	P-G11558-5	P-G11558-11	P-G11558-8	P-G11558-15	P-G11558-2	P-G11558-7	P-G11558-13	P-G11558-16	P-G11558-20	P-G11558-6	P-G11558-22	P-G11558-9	P-G11558-10	P-G11558-19	P-G11558-17	P-G11558-12	P-G11558-14	P-G11558-4	P-G11558-3	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat
Protocol Type	grow	grow	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation
Protocol Description	Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype col2 seedlings were grown in a 12h light / 12 h dark cycle (day and night temperature was 22Â&deg;C) on vertical agar plates supplemented with half-strength Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium (Duchefa Biochemie B.V., Haarlem, the Netherlands) supplemented with 1% sucrose. The roots of the plants were growing on the surface of the agar, thus avoiding restricted oxygen diffusion towards the roots by the agar medium.	Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype col2 seedlings were grown in a 12h light / 12 h dark cycle (day and night temperature was 22Ã‚Â&deg;C) on vertical agar plates supplemented with half-strength Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium (Duchefa Biochemie B.V., Haarlem, the Netherlands) supplemented with 1% sucrose. The roots of the plants were growing on the surface of the agar, thus avoiding restricted oxygen diffusion towards the roots by the agar medium.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 21% oxygen , 350 ppm CO2, and N2 (control) was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 48 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 1% oxygen concentrations, 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 30 min of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 4% oxygen concentrations, 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 48 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 4% oxygen concentrations, 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 2 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 8% oxygen , 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 30 minutes of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 1% oxygen concentrations, 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 2 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 1% oxygen concentrations, 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 48 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 8% oxygen , 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 2 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 8% oxygen , 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 48 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 21% oxygen , 350 ppm CO2, and N2 (control) was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 30 min of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 1% oxygen concentrations, 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 30min of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 8% oxygen , 350 ppm CO2, and N2 (control) was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 48 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 4% oxygen concentrations, 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 30 min of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 4% oxygen concentrations, 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 30 min. of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 21% oxygen , 350 ppm CO2, and N2 (control) was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 2 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 21% oxygen , 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 2 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Ten days after germination, seedlings were transferred to continuous darkness and a stream of premixed air containing 4% oxygen, 350 ppm CO2, and N2 was blown over the plates. Oxygen concentrations within the plates were regularly controlled to ensure precise regulation of the actual oxygen concentration around the roots. Roots were harvested in liquid nitrogen after 48 hours of each oxygen treatment.	Trizol, according to the protocol recommended by the supplier (GibcoBRL Life Technologies)	Trizol, according to the protocol recommended by the supplier (GibcoBRL Life Technologies	10ug of total RNA was biotin labelled	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 
Protocol Parameters																									
Protocol Hardware																									
Protocol Software																							MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact																									
Protocol Term Source REF																							mo		The MGED Ontology
SDRF File	E-GEOD-11558.sdrf.txt																								
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology	mo																		
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php																		
Term Source Version																									
