Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis auxin resistant axr4 mutant and wild-type Col0				
Comment[Submitted Name]	Comparison of the transcript profile of the auxin resistant axr4 mutant and wild-type Col0				
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array			
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO			
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array				
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis mutant for axr4				
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14				
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6168				
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4				
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6168				
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 19:10:10 Last Changed Rev: 13058				
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE				
Experimental Factor Type	genotype				
Experimental Factor Term Source REF					
Person Last Name	(NASC)				
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre				
Person Mid Initials					
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info				
Person Phone					
Person Fax					
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom				
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)				
Person Roles	submitter				
Person Roles Term Source REF					
Quality Control Type					
Quality Control Term Source REF					
Replicate Type					
Replicate Term Source REF					
Normalization Type					
Normalization Term Source REF					
Date of Experiment					
Public Release Date	2008-06-14				
PubMed ID					
Publication DOI					
Publication Author List					
Publication Title					
Publication Status					
Publication Status Term Source REF					
Experiment Description	The plant hormone auxin represents an important regulator of growth and development. Significant insight into the mechanisms of auxin action have been obtained from studies of auxin resistant mutants such as aux1 and axr3. The Arabidopsis axr4 mutant was identified in a screen for auxin resistant root growth. In addition to the root growth of axr4 being resistant to exogenous auxin, there is also a 50% reduction in the number of lateral roots that form. The double axr4/aux1 mutant shows an additive effect in reducing lateral root numbers to 10% of wild-type. Gaining further information about the potential interaction between AUX1 and AXR4 may provide important insight into auxin regulated plant growth. Mapping experiments have placed the AXR4 gene on the lower arm of chromosome 1 between the ch1 and le markers (Hobbie and Estelle 1995). However, the AXR4 gene remains to be cloned. Identifying the AXR4 gene will help in elucidating the function of the protein. A transcript analysis of axr4 mutant seedlings will be used in 2 ways. Firstly, the transcription level of genes in the locality of the axr4 map position will be examined to identify those which are absent or significantly reduced in axr4 compared to the Col0 control. If the lesion causing the axr4 mutation results in a highly unstable mRNA or abolishes transcription then the signal will be dramatically reduced. Potential candidate genes identified in this way will be further analysed using a combination of RT-PCR and sequencing to identify the AXR4 gene.  Secondly, the transcriptomics data obtained from axr4 and Col0 will be compared to identify genes which show significant transcript level differences and therefore represent targets for either direct or indirect regulation by AXR4.  Hobbie, L. and Estelle, M. (1995) The axr4 auxin-resistant mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana define a gene important for root gravitropism and lateral root initiation. Plant J. 7 211-220 Experiment Overall Design: 2 samples				
Protocol Name	P-G6168-1	P-G6168-3	P-G6168-2	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	unknown; Parameter Light = 24hr; Parameter Temperature = 22C; Performer: Alan,,Marchant	Qiagen / Trizol; Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol ; Protocol Type = nucleic_acid_extraction; Performer: Alan,,Marchant	Preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA; RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Â&deg;C for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.   ; Protocol Type = labeling; Performers: John,Y,Okyere, Janet,,Higgins	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters					
Protocol Hardware					
Protocol Software				MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact					
Protocol Term Source REF				mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6168.sdrf.txt				
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version					
