Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis root developmental zones after treatment with salt						
Comment[Submitted Name]	Expression analysis of root developmental zones after treatment with salt						
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array					
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO					
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis root developmental zones after treatment with NaCl						
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-15						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE7639						
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4						
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-7639						
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-07 20:07:15 Last Changed Rev: 13058						
Experimental Factor Name	GROWTH CONDITION	ORGANISM PART					
Experimental Factor Type	growth_condition	organism_part					
Experimental Factor Term Source REF							
Person Last Name	Dinneny						
Person First Name	Jose Ramon						
Person Mid Initials							
Person Email	jdinneny@duke.edu						
Person Phone							
Person Fax							
Person Address	Philip N. Benfey, Biology, Duke University, Box 90338, Durham, 27708, USA						
Person Affiliation	Duke University						
Person Roles	submitter						
Person Roles Term Source REF							
Quality Control Type							
Quality Control Term Source REF							
Replicate Type							
Replicate Term Source REF							
Normalization Type							
Normalization Term Source REF							
Date of Experiment							
Public Release Date	2008-06-15						
PubMed ID	18436742						
Publication DOI	10.1126/science.1153795						
Publication Author List	Dinneny JR, Long TA, Wang JY, Jung JW, Mace D, Pointer S, Barron C, Brady SM, Schiefelbein J, Benfey PN						
Publication Title	Cell Identity Mediates the Response of Arabidopsis Roots to Abiotic Stress.						
Publication Status	published						
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO						
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796						
Experiment Description	To gain a genome-scale understanding of the role that developmental processes play in regulating stimulus response, we examined the effect of salt stress on gene expression along the longitudinal axis of the root.  Since roots grow from stem cells located near the tip, the position of cells along the longitudinal axis can be used as a proxy for developmental time, with distance from the root tip correlating with increased differentiation.  To estimate the role developmental stage plays in regulating salt response, roots were dissected into four longitudinal zones (LZ data set) after transfer to standard or salt media and transcriptionally profiled. Cells are amazingly adept at integrating both external and internal cues to regulate transcriptional states.  While internal processes such as differentiation and cell-type specification are generally understood to have an important impact on gene expression, very little is known about how cells utilize these developmental cues to regulate responses to external stimuli.  Here we use the response to a well characterized environmental stress, high salinity, to obtain a global view of the role that cell identity plays in guiding transcriptional responses in the root of Arabidopsis.  Our analysis is based on three microarray data sets we have generated that explore transcriptional changes spatially among 6 cell layers and 4 longitudinal regions or temporally along 5 time points after salt treatment.  We show that the majority of the response to salt stress is cell-type specific resulting in the differential regulation of unique biological functions in subsets of cell layers.  To understand the regulatory mechanisms controlling these responses we have analyzed cis-element enrichment in the promoters of salt responsive genes and demonstrate that known stress regulatory elements likely control responses to salt occurring in multiple cell types.  Despite the extensive shift in transcriptional state that salt stress elicits, we are able to identify several biological processes that consistently define each cell layer and find that transcriptional regulators of cell-identity tend to exhibit robust cell-type specific expression.  Finally, using mutants that disrupt cell-type specification in the epidermis, we reveal cell autonomous and non-autonomous effects when cell identity is altered.  Together, these data elucidate a novel intersection between physiology and development and expand our understanding of how transcriptional states are regulated in a multi-cellular context. Experiment Overall Design: Roots were grown under standard conditions for 5 days then transfered to standard media or media supplemented with 140 mM NaCl.  One hour after transferring seedlings, roots were cut into 4 regions using a razor blade.  The first cut was made ~150 µm from the root tip at the point where the shape of the root transitions from conical to cylindrical (Zone 1).  The second cut was made ~200 µm above the first cut, at the point were the root becomes less optically dense, which marks the approximate end of the meristematic zone (Zone 2).  The third cut was made ~200-300 µm above the second cut, just below the region where root hairs begin to emerge (Zone 3).  The fourth cut was made ~1 mm above the third cut (Zone 4).						
Protocol Name	P-G7639-1	P-G7639-2	P-G7639-4	P-G7639-3	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat
Protocol Type	grow	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation
Protocol Description	Seeds were surface sterilized with 50% Bleach and 0.1% Tween for 5 minutes and then rinsed 3 times with sterile water.  Seeds were stratified at 4˚C for 2 days before being planted on standard media.  Standard media is 1X concentration Murashige and Skoog salt mixture (Caisson laboratories), 0.5g/L MES, 1% sucrose, 1% agar and adjusted to pH 5.7 with KOH.  Salt media is standard media with varying amounts of NaCl added.  Nylon mesh was placed on top of the solidified media and seeds were evenly placed on the mesh in a single row at a density of ~2/cm for all experiments.	Seedlings were grown for 5 days before transfer to standard media or standard media supplemented with 140mM NaCl.  One hour after transferring seedlings to media, roots were cut into 4 regions using a razor blade.	Approximately 15 sections were dissected for each replicate and pooled.  Samples were collected into RNA extraction buffer and briefly sonicated to disrupt the tissue.  RNA was extracted using the RNAeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen GmbH).	Fragmented cRNA probes were prepared using the two-cycle amplification protocol by Affymetrix.	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 
Protocol Parameters							
Protocol Hardware							
Protocol Software					MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact							
Protocol Term Source REF					mo		
SDRF File	E-GEOD-7639.sdrf.txt						
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version							
