Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis thaliana ARRESTED DEVELOPMENT 3 mutant.				
Comment[Submitted Name]	Transcriptome analysis of ARRESTED DEVELOPMENT 3 mutant.				
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array			
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO			
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array				
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis mutant for ADD3				
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14				
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE5712				
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4				
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-5712				
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 17:17:04 Last Changed Rev: 13058				
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE				
Experimental Factor Type	genotype				
Experimental Factor Term Source REF					
Person Last Name	(NASC)				
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre				
Person Mid Initials					
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info				
Person Phone					
Person Fax					
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom				
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)				
Person Roles	submitter				
Person Roles Term Source REF					
Quality Control Type					
Quality Control Term Source REF					
Replicate Type					
Replicate Term Source REF					
Normalization Type					
Normalization Term Source REF					
Date of Experiment					
Public Release Date	2008-06-14				
PubMed ID					
Publication DOI					
Publication Author List					
Publication Title					
Publication Status					
Publication Status Term Source REF					
Experiment Description	Aims: Comparison of transcriptome between mutant and wild-type plant. Based on the temperature sensitive period of the mutant the gene likely acts during the earliest stages of the specification of the leaf primordium. Background: The ARRESTED DEVELOPMENT 3 mutation causes a temperature dependent loss of all spongy mesophyll and most palisade parenchyma in developing leaves. Although these leaves lack most internal tissues excepting vasculature they continue to expand away from the main axis of plant growth. Mature leaves have a small midrib and marginal regions that are large balloons of epidermis covering airspace. add3 is a temperature sensitive mutation whose most severe phenotypic response occurs at a restrictive temperature of 29 degrees C. Using BAC and TAC filters a recombinant population we have generated and available and newly developed molecular markers a high resolution (1000 chromosomes scored) physical genetic map has been completed to define the physical extent of the locus. Transformation rescue and RNAi experiments are currently underway to determine if a candidate gene identified using the approach outlined above is ADD3. Experimentalia: Wild-type and add3 tissue will be grown at 29 degrees C until the first two true leaves have emerged. Two days after emergence the aerial portions of the plants will be collected and RNA will be isolated. This developmental stage will provide plants with primordia in various stages of development. The wild-type tissue will serve as a control for exposure of developing primordia to high temperature the add3 plants will provide the experimental transcriptome. We intend to use RNA isolation protocols provided by the former AFGC facility for isolation of RNA. Conclusion:ADD3 is the first mutant from our collection of temperature sensitive mutations affecting shoot, floral and root organogenesis to be studied at the transcriptome level. Our work modeling the evolution of gene duplicates and genetic redundancy suggests that temperature conditional redundancy may be common in plants (Pickett and Meeks-Wagner Plant Cell 19957 1347-1356)(Force,Lynch,Pickett et al. Genetics 1999151 1531-1545). A highly similar gene to the ADD3 candidate gene has been identified. An exploration of the utility of transcriptomics to describe phenotypic impacts of potential conditionally redundant mutants is particularly timely. Many reverse genetics experiments in Arabidopsis result in "mutants" displaying small or no impacts on phenotype. The completion of the Arabidopsis genome sequence suggests that this experience may become common. Experimenter name = F. Bryan Pickett; Experimenter institute = Loyola University of Chicago; Experimenter address = Dept. of Biology; Experimenter address = Loyola University of Chicago; Experimenter address = 6525 N. Sheridan Rd. Experimenter address = Chicago, IL; Experimenter zip/postal_code = 60626; Experimenter country = USA Experiment Overall Design: 4 samples were used in this experiment				
Protocol Name	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6			
Protocol Type	hybridization	feature_extraction			
Protocol Description	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 			
Protocol Parameters					
Protocol Hardware					
Protocol Software	MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0			
Protocol Contact					
Protocol Term Source REF	mo				
SDRF File	E-GEOD-5712.sdrf.txt				
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version					
