Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-16865
MAGE-TAB Version	1.1															
Public Release Date	2009-07-04
Investigation Title	Heterologous microarrays for the study of drought stress in Musa															
Comment[Submitted Name]	Heterologous microarrays for the study of drought stress in Musa
Experiment Description	'Systems-wide' approaches such as microarray RNA-profiling are ideally suited to the study of the complex, overlapping responses of plants to biotic and abiotic stresses. However, commercial microarrays are only available for a limited number of plant species and development costs are so substantial as to be prohibitive for most research groups. Here, we evaluate the use of cross-hybridisation to Affymetrix oligonucleotide GeneChip microarrays to profile the response of the banana (Musa sp.) leaf transcriptome to drought stress using a genomic DNA (gDNA)-based probe-selection strategy to improve the efficiency of detection of differentially expressed Musa transcripts. GeneChip analyses were performed to profile the response of the banana (Musa sp.) leaf transcriptome to drought stress using a genomic DNA (gDNA)-based probe-selection strategy to improve the efficiency of detection of differentially expressed Musa transcripts.															
Term Source Name	ArrayExpress	EFO
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl														
Person Last Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)	Davey	Graham	Vanholme	Swennen	May	Keulemans									
Person First Name		Mark	Neil	Bartel	Rony	Sean	Johan									
Person Mid Initials		W	S			T										
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info															
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)															
Person Phone	+44 (0)115 951 3237															
Person Fax	+44 (0)115 951 3297															
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, United Kingdom															
Person Roles	submitter															
Protocol Name	P-GSE16865-2	P-GSE16865-1	P-GSE16865-12	P-GSE16865-7	P-GSE16865-11	P-GSE16865-16	P-GSE16865-6	P-GSE16865-14	P-GSE16865-9	P-GSE16865-4	P-GSE16865-3	P-GSE16865-10	P-GSE16865-5	P-GSE16865-13	P-GSE16865-15	P-GSE16865-8
Protocol Description	ID_REF =  VALUE = MAS5.0 signal intensity ABS_CALL = indicating whether the transcript was present (P), absent (A), or marginal (M) DETECTION P-VALUE = p-value that indicates the significance level of the detection call	ID_REF =  VALUE = RMA signal	Scanning done with G2500A GeneArray scanner as described in the Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual.	GeneChip arrays were scanned with an Affymetrix G2500A GeneArray scanner, as described in the Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual.	Genomic DNA hybridisation was carried out essentially as described by Hammond et al. In brief, labeled gDNA was hybridised to the Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array for 16 h at 45oC, using standard Affymetrix hybridisation protocols. This was then followed by the Affymetrix eukaryotic wash protocol that included antibody staining. The GeneChip Genome Arrays were then hybridised with 0.5 ug of target Musa genomic DNA. GeneChip arrays were stained with Streptavidin-Phycoerythrin solution as described by the Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual (http://www.affymetrix.com). Only one genomic DNA hybridisation was performed, as replicate genomic DNA hybridisations all challenge the GeneChip arrays with the whole genome.	The cRNAs were randomly fragmented at 94oC for 35 min in a buffer containing 40 mM Tris-acetate (pH 8.1), 100 mM potassium acetate, and 30 mM magnesium acetate to generate molecules of approximately 35 to 200 bp. Affymetrix A. thaliana ATH1 Genome or Rice Genome Arrays were then hybridised with 15 ug of fragmented, labeled cRNA for 16 h at 45C as described in the Affymetrix Technical Analysis Manual. GeneChip arrays were stained with Streptavidin-Phycoerythrin solution as described by the Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual (http://www.affymetrix.com).	The cRNAs were randomly fragmented at 94oC for 35 min in a buffer containing 40 mM Tris-acetate (pH 8.1), 100 mM potassium acetate, and 30 mM magnesium acetate to generate molecules of approximately 35 to 200 bp. Affymetrix A. thaliana ATH1 Genome or Rice Genome Arrays were then hybridised with 15 ug of fragmented, labeled cRNA for 16 h at 45oC as described in the Affymetrix Technical Analysis Manual. GeneChip arrays were stained with Streptavidin-Phycoerythrin solution as described by the Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual (http://www.affymetrix.com).	Genomic DNA hybridisation was carried out essentially as described by Hammond et al. In brief, labeled gDNA was hybridised to the Rice Genome Arrays for 16 h at 45oC, using standard Affymetrix hybridisation protocols. This was then followed by the Affymetrix eukaryotic wash protocol that included antibody staining. The GeneChip Genome Arrays were then hybridised with 0.5 ug of target Musa genomic DNA. GeneChip arrays were stained with Streptavidin-Phycoerythrin solution as described by the Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis Technical Manual (http://www.affymetrix.com). Only one genomic DNA hybridisation was performed, as replicate genomic DNA hybridisations all challenge the GeneChip arrays with the whole genome.	Genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated from young leaves which had been kept in the dark for 48 h to deplete starch and polysaccharide levels using a modified CTAB method essentially as according to Michiels et al. Contaminating RNA was removed by addition of 2.5 ul of a 10 ug/ml stock solution of RNase and incubation at 37oC for 30 min. To check the quality and quantity of DNA, 1 ul samples of isolated DNA were run on a 1% agarose gel in TAE buffer (0.04 M Tris-acetate; 1 mM EDTA, pH 8) as outlined by Sambrook et al. After staining of the gel with ethidium bromide for 15 min, DNA concentrations were visually estimated by comparison to different amounts of lambda-DNA run at the same time. genomic DNA quality was determined spectrophotometrically using the AU absorbance ratios at 260/280 nm. Samples with a 260/280 ratio of 1.9-2.0 were considered 'pure'.	RNA was extracted using a modified Tris-LiCl method, based on the work of Tattersall et al. The modifications involved a DNAse treatment and an additional phenol:chloroform cleanup step. RNA concentrations and purity were determined using a MultiScan Spectrum microtitre plate scanning UV-VIS spectrophotometer (Multiskan Spectrum, Thermolabsystems, Brussels, Belgium). For purity assessment, the AU 260/280 and AU 260/230 ratios were measured and samples with a ratio of ~2.0 were considered as 'pure'. One microgram of total RNA sample was also run on a 1% agarose gel containing ethidium bromide in TAE buffer to check for possible degradation. Gels were imaged using a GelDoc 1000 gel imaging system and Molecular Analyst v1.5 image analysis software version 4 (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).	Plants were grown at a density of 24 plants per table under a standardised light/dark regime of 12/12 h at 26/23oC respectively with a light intensity of around 10,000 lux (300 watts/m2) and a relative humidity of 75%. At the onset of the experiment, all plants were hand-watered until water drained freely from the base of the pots. The control plants were then watered once a day by flooding the tables with a fertigation solution and allowing the pots to stand for 30 min. Water-deficit (drought) conditions were imposed by withholding water supply for in total up to five weeks. Leaf samples consisted of a 5-8 cm wide strip (~3g fresh weight) removed from one side of the middle of the second, fully expanded leaf down from the top of the plant. Samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80oC until analysis. All sampling took place between 14:00 and 17:00 pm.	Musa genomic DNA was labeled using the Bioprime DNA hybridisation System (Invitrogen).	Approximately 5 ug of Musa total RNA was reverse transcribed at 42oC for 1 h to generate first strand cDNA using 100 pmol oligo dT(24) primer containing a 5'-T7 RNA polymerase promoter sequence, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 10 mM dNTPs and 200 units SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen Life Technologies). Following first strand cDNA synthesis, second strand cDNA was synthesised using 10 units of Escherichia coli polymerase I, 10 units of E. coli DNA ligase and 2 units of RNase H in a reaction containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM (NH4)SO4, 0.15 mM beta-NAD+ and 10 mM dNTPs. This second strand synthesis reaction proceeded at 16oC for 2 h before 10 units of T4 DNA polymerase was added and the reaction allowed to proceed for a further 5 min. The reaction was terminated by adding 0.5 M EDTA. Double stranded cDNA products were purified using the GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module (Affymetrix). The synthesised cDNAs were transcribed in-vitro using T7 RNA polymerase (Enzo BioArray High Yield RNA Transcript Labelling Kit, Enzo Life Sciences Inc., Farmingdale, NY, USA) and biotinylated nucleotides to generate biotinylated complementary RNAs (cRNAs). The cRNAs were then purified using the Affymetrix Sample Cleanup Module (Affymetrix).	From these results a genomic DNA cell intensity file (.cel file) was generated using the Microarray Analysis Suite software (MAS, v5.0, Affymetrix). This .cel file contains the hybridisation intensities between Musa genomic DNA fragments and all the A. thaliana GeneChip oligonucleotide probes. Probes showing a suitably strong cross-hybridisation signal were selected from the .cel file, using a .cel file parser script (Xspecies v 1.1, available with instructions at http://affymetrix.arabidopsis.info/xspecies/) written in the Perl programming language (http://www.perl.com). This Perl script creates a probe mask (.cdf) file, which is compatible with a range of microarray analysis software packages and provides the template for the generation of a signal across the probeset when analyzing the test (Musa) transcriptome (i.e. the RNA .cel files). Specifically it allows information to be extracted from the RNA .cel files for only those probe-pairs whose perfect-match (PM) probe genomic DNA hybridisation intensity value is above a user-defined hybridisation intensity threshold (CDF value). In practice the optimal genomic DNA CDF is determined systematically and empirically using probe masks created with CDF values of between 50 and 1000. A probeset is retained for analysis when it is represented by at least one PM probe-pair per probeset. Therefore one 25 bp probe, identical in sequence to a Musa genomic DNA fragment is the minimum requirement for inclusion of that probeset in the subsequent transcriptome analysis of the target Musa RNA.	From these results a genomic DNA cell intensity file (.cel file) was generated using the Microarray Analysis Suite software (MAS, v5.0, Affymetrix). This .cel file contains the hybridisation intensities between Musa genomic DNA fragments and all the Rice GeneChip oligonucleotide probes. Probes showing a suitably strong cross-hybridisation signal were selected from the .cel file, using a .cel file parser script (Xspecies v 1.1, available with instructions at http://affymetrix.arabidopsis.info/xspecies/) written in the Perl programming language (http://www.perl.com). This Perl script creates a probe mask (.cdf) file, which is compatible with a range of microarray analysis software packages and provides the template for the generation of a signal across the probeset when analyzing the test (Musa) transcriptome (i.e. the RNA .cel files). Specifically it allows information to be extracted from the RNA .cel files for only those probe-pairs whose perfect-match (PM) probe genomic DNA hybridisation intensity value is above a user-defined hybridisation intensity threshold (CDF value). In practice the optimal genomic DNA CDF is determined systematically and empirically using probe masks created with CDF values of between 50 and 1000. A probeset is retained for analysis when it is represented by at least one PM probe-pair per probeset. Therefore one 25 bp probe, identical in sequence to a Musa genomic DNA fragment is the minimum requirement for inclusion of that probeset in the subsequent transcriptome analysis of the target Musa RNA.	The Microarray Analysis Suite (MAS Version 5.0; Affymetrix) was used to generate .cel files for each of the RNA hybridisations by scanning and computing summary intensities for each probe without the use of probe mask files. These .cel files were then loaded into the GeneSpring (Agilent Technologies) analysis software package using the Robust Multichip Average (RMA) pre-normalisation algorithm. During .cel file loading and pre-normalisation, .cel files were interpreted using the respective A. thaliana or rice .cdf files (i.e. with no probe-selection used), or (2) using .cdf files generated from the Musa genomic DNA .cel file with CDF values ranging from 0 to 1000. Following RMA pre-normalisation and masking of individual probes, each probeset signal value from treated (drought stressed) samples was standardised relative to the probeset signal value of its corresponding control, to give the relative gene expression ratios between the two conditions.
Protocol Type	bioassay_data_transformation	bioassay_data_transformation	image_aquisition	image_aquisition	hybridization	hybridization	hybridization	hybridization	nucleic_acid_extraction	nucleic_acid_extraction	grow	labeling	labeling	feature_extraction	feature_extraction	feature_extraction
Experimental Factor Name	TREATMENT															
Experimental Factor Type	treatment															
Publication Title	Heterologous oligonucleotide microarrays for transcriptomics in a non-model species; a proof-of-concept study of drought stress in Musa.															
Publication Author List	Davey MW, Graham NS, Vanholme B, Swennen R, May ST, Keulemans J															
PubMed ID	19758430															
Publication DOI	10.1186/1471-2164-10-436															
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE16865															
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2009-07-04															
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2009-06-26															
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2012-12-20															
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array															
Comment[AEExperimentType]	other															
SDRF File	E-GEOD-16865.sdrf.txt
