Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-18071				Investigation Title	"Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type and pnp mutant plants with respect to their morphology, metabolite profiles, and transcriptomes"				Comment[Submitted Name]	Chloroplast polynucleotide phosphorylase null mutant (pnp1-1) and phosphate starvation				Publication Title	Abnormal physiological and molecular mutant phenotypes link chloroplast polynucleotide phosphorylase to the phosphorus deprivation response in Arabidopsis.				Publication Author List	"Yehudai-Resheff Marchive, Fei Germain, Judkins Jiang, Fernie Wu, Stern Fait"				Publication DOI	10.1104/pp.109.145144				PubMed ID	19710229				Publication Status	published				Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO				Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796				Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array			Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO			Person Last Name	Marchive				Person First Name	Chloe				Person Email	cm363@cornell.edu				Person Address	"Stern Lab, Boyce Thompson Institute, Tower road, Ithaca, 14850, USA"				Person Affiliation	Boyce Thompson Institute				Person Roles	submitter				Public Release Date	2009-09-18				Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2009-09-11				Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2009-09-12				Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE18071				Experiment Description	"A prominent enzyme in organellar RNA metabolism is the exoribonuclease polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase), whose reversible activity is governed by the nucleotides diphosphate-inorganic phosphate ratio. In Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, PNPase regulates chloroplast transcript accumulation in response to phosphorus (P) starvation, and PNPase expression is repressed by the response regulator PSR1 under these conditions. Here, we investigated the role of PNPase in the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) P deprivation response by comparing wild-type and pnp mutant plants with respect to their morphology, metabolite profiles, and transcriptomes. We found that P-deprived pnp mutants develop aborted clusters of lateral roots, which are characterized by decreased auxin responsiveness and cell division, and exhibit cell death at the root tips. Electron microscopy revealed that the collapse of root organelles is enhanced in the pnp mutant under P deprivation and occurred with low frequency under P-replete conditions. Global analyses of metabolites and transcripts were carried out to understand the molecular bases of these altered P deprivation responses. We found that the pnp mutant expresses some elements of the deprivation response even when grown on a full nutrient medium, including altered transcript accumulation, although its total and inorganic P contents are not reduced. The pnp mutation also confers P status-independent responses, including but not limited to stress responses. Taken together, our data support the hypothesis that the activity of the chloroplast PNPase is involved in plant acclimation to P availability and that it may help maintain an appropriate balance of P metabolites even under normal growth conditions. Experiment Overall Design: For each timepoints (3h and one week), we compared WT and pnp1-1 on +P and on -P, so a total of eight conditions For each condition, three biological replicates of at least 4 seedlings (without roots) were analyzed."				Protocol Name	P-G18071-2	P-G18071-3	P-G18071-4	P-G18071-5	P-G18071-1Protocol Type	specified_biomaterial_action	labeling	bioassay_data_transformation	nucleic_acid_extraction	growProtocol Description	"After two weeks, they were transferred to fresh +P or -P MS medium. For the -P medium, KH2PO4 was omitted but the potassium was compensated by K2SO4. Plantlets were rinsed with distilled water before transfer and then grown for 3h or one week."	"One microgram of each total RNA sample was labeled using MessageAmp™ II-Biotin /Enhanced/ Single Round aRNA Amplification Kit from Ambion (Austin, TX), according to manufacture provided protocol."	"Raw array data were normalized at the probe level using gcRMA (Wu et al., 2004). The detection calls (present, marginal, or absent) for each probe set were obtained using the mas5calls function in the Affy package (Gautier et al., 2004). Only genes with at least one present call across all of the compared samples were used to identify differentially expressed genes. Significance of gene expression was determined using the LIMMA test (Smyth, 2004), and raw P values of multiple tests were corrected using FDR (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). Genes with FDR , 0.05 and fold change $ 2 were identified as differentially expressed."	"Total RNA was isolated from seedlings, from which roots had been removed, using the RNeasy Plant Minikit (Qiagen), including DNase treatment according to the manufacturer’s instructions."	WT and pnp1-1 plants  (Columbia -0) were germinated and grown for 2 weeks on a full nutrient MS medium (+P) containing 0.6% phytagar (w/v) and 0.5% (w/v) Suc at 22˚C in a growth chamber under a 16-h photoperiod (with a fluorescent light intensity of 200 μmol m-2 s-1Protocol Parameters					Protocol Software					SDRF File	E-GEOD-18071.sdrf.txt				Term Source Name	EFO				Term Source File	http://efo.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/efo/trunk/src/efoinowl/efo.owl				Experimental Factor Name	genotype	growth condition	time		Experimental Factor Type	genotype	growth condition	time		Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array				Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis mutant for pnp after phosphate deprivation				