Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis wild-type, thylakoidal ascorbate peroxidase overexpressor (over tAPX, line 14/2), flu mutant and flu plants overexpressing thylakoidal ascorbate peroxidase						
Comment[AdditionalFile:XLS]	E-GEOD-10812.hybs.xls						
Comment[Submitted Name]	Expression data from thylakoidal ascorbate peroxidase overexpressor Arabidopsis thaliana (Col) rosette leaves						
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array					
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO					
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis mutant for flu and/or expressing tAPX under the control of the 35S promoter						
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4						
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-04-05						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE10812						
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-10812						
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-07-29 22:21:23 Last Changed Rev: 13058						
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE						
Experimental Factor Type	genotype						
Experimental Factor Term Source REF							
Person Last Name	Laloi						
Person First Name	Christophe						
Person Mid Initials							
Person Email	claloi@ethz.ch						
Person Phone							
Person Fax							
Person Address	LFW D17.2, Institute of Plant Science, ETH Zurich, Universitaetstrasse 2, Zurich, 8092, Switzerland						
Person Affiliation	ETH Zurich						
Person Roles	submitter						
Person Roles Term Source REF	The MGED Ontology						
Quality Control Type							
Quality Control Term Source REF							
Replicate Type							
Replicate Term Source REF							
Normalization Type							
Normalization Term Source REF							
Date of Experiment							
Public Release Date	2008-04-05						
PubMed ID	17197417						
Publication DOI	10.1073/pnas.0609063103						
Publication Author List	Christophe Laloi, Monika Stachowiak, Emilia Pers-Kamczyc, Ewelina Warzych, Irene Murgia, Klaus Apel						
Publication Title	Cross-talk between singlet oxygen- and hydrogen peroxide-dependent signaling of stress responses in Arabidopsis thaliana.						
Publication Status	published						
Publication Status Term Source REF	EFO						
Publication Status Term Accession Number	EFO_0001796						
Experiment Description	We used the flu mutant of Arabidopsis and a transgenic line that overexpresses the thylakoid-bound ascorbate peroxidase (tAPX) to address the interactions between different reactive oxygen species (ROS) signaling pathways. The conditional flu mutant of Arabidopsis accumulates excess protochlorophyllide in the dark within chloroplast membranes that upon illumination acts as a photosensitizer and generates singlet oxygen (1O2). Immediately after the release of singlet oxygen rapid changes in nuclear gene expression occur. Distinct sets of genes were activated that were different from those induced by other reactive oxygen species, superoxide or hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), suggesting that different types of active oxygen species activate distinct signaling pathways. It was not known whether the pathways operate separately or interact with each other. We have addressed this problem by modulating noninvasively the level of H2O2 in plastids by means of a transgenic line that overexpresses the thylakoid-bound ascorbate peroxidase (tAPX, line 14/2  PMID: 15165186). In the flu mutant overexpressing tAPX, the expression of most of the nuclear genes that were rapidly activated after the release of 1O2 was significantly higher in flu plants overexpressing tAPX, whereas in wild-type plants, overexpression of tAPX had only a very minor impact on nuclear gene expression. The results suggest that H2O2 antagonizes the 1O2-mediated signaling of stress responses as seen in the flu mutant. This cross-talk between H2O2- and 1O2-dependent signaling pathways might contribute to the overall stability and robustness of wild-type plants exposed to adverse environmental stress conditions. Experiment Overall Design: Arabidopsis thaliana rosette leaves were harvested after 2 h of reillumination following a 8h dark period for RNA extraction and hybridization on Affymetrix ATH1 microarrays. The entire experiment was performed six times, providing independent biological replicates. For each of the six experiments, all four lines, wild-type, thylakoidal ascorbate peroxidase overexpressor (over tAPX, line 14/2), flu mutant and flu plants overexpressing thylakoidal ascorbate peroxidase were grown for 3 weeks under continuous light at 90 mmol. m-2 . s-1, transferred to the dark for 8 h, and reilluminated for 120 min before the rosette leaves of at least 10 plants per line were harvested. Total RNAs from three separate biological experiments were pooled (= 1 biological rep.) for the preparation of cDNA and the subsequent synthesis of biotin-labeled complementary RNA as recommended by Affymetrix.						
Protocol Name	P-10812-2	P-10812-3	P-10812-5	P-10812-4	P-10812-1	P-AFFY-6	Affymetrix:Protocol:ExpressionStat
Protocol Type	grow	specified_biomaterial_action	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction	bioassay_data_transformation
Protocol Description	Plants were grown on soil for 3 weeks under continuous light at 90 mmol. m-2 . s-1	Plants were transferred to the dark for 8 h and rosette leaves were harvested 2 h after reillumination.	total RNA extraction was performed according to the guanidine-hydrochloride method as described in Melzer, S., Majewski, D. M. & Apel, K. (1990) Plant Cell 2, 953-961.	Biotinylated cRNA were prepared according to the standard Affymetrix protocol from 5 ug total RNA (Eukaryotic Target Preparation, 2002, Affymetrix).	Following fragmentation, 15 ug of cRNA were hybridized for 16 hr at 45C on GeneChip Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Array. GeneChips were washed and stained in the Affymetrix Fluidics Station 450, protocol EukGE-WS2v4.	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CHP Analysis (ExpressionStat). Description: 
Protocol Parameters							
Protocol Hardware							
Protocol Software						MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact							
Protocol Term Source REF							The MGED Ontology
SDRF File	E-GEOD-10812.sdrf.txt						
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy		The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	The MGED Ontology	
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/		http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	
Term Source Version							
