Investigation Title	Transcription profiling of Arabidopsis transgenics with extra copies of the chalcone synthase (CHS) gene mutated by ems and screened for revertants reveals genes affected by hog1 alleviation of chs silencing				
Comment[Submitted Name]	Genes affected by hog1 alleviation of CHS silencing				
Experimental Design	unknown_experiment_design_type	transcription profiling by array			
Experimental Design Term Source REF		EFO			
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array				
Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis after CHS silencing				
Comment[ArrayExpressReleaseDate]	2008-06-14				
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE6166				
Comment[AEMIAMESCORE]	4				
Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-6166				
Comment[MAGETAB TimeStamp_Version]	2010-08-06 19:15:53 Last Changed Rev: 13058				
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE				
Experimental Factor Type	genotype				
Experimental Factor Term Source REF					
Person Last Name	(NASC)				
Person First Name	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre				
Person Mid Initials					
Person Email	affy@arabidopsis.info				
Person Phone					
Person Fax					
Person Address	School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC), Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom				
Person Affiliation	Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (NASC)				
Person Roles	submitter				
Person Roles Term Source REF					
Quality Control Type					
Quality Control Term Source REF					
Replicate Type					
Replicate Term Source REF					
Normalization Type					
Normalization Term Source REF					
Date of Experiment					
Public Release Date	2008-06-14				
PubMed ID					
Publication DOI					
Publication Author List					
Publication Title					
Publication Status					
Publication Status Term Source REF					
Experiment Description	As part of an investigation into mechanisms of HDG silencing in Arabidopsis, we have produced transgenic plants containing extra copies of the chalcone synthase (CHS) gene. The CHS gene mediates an early step in the biosynthesis of the purple pigment anthocyanin. The insertion of extra copies of CHS in Arabidopsis caused the gene to be silenced in some plants.  Seeds harvested from these CHS-silenced plants were mutated by treatment with ems. The progeny of these seeds were screened for "revertants" in which the effects of CHS silencing was alleviated and plants were able to produce anthocyanin. These revertants were found to contain a single recessive mutation; the trait has been termed hog1 (for homology dependant gene silencing 1). Our previous experiment used the Affymetrix 8200 chip to make comparisons between gene expression in the two genetic variants:  the CHS-silenced type (ECG) and the anthocyanin-producing revertants (15B). Results showed that there were over 100 genes with at least a 10-fold increase or decrease in expression. However, the variation between 2 reps of each genetic variant was high. We would now like to carry out  a modified version of this experiment using the 25K Affymetrix chip. It is intended to increase the number of reps to 4, and take samples at an earlier stage than previously in order to decrease the effect of developmental spread. To reduce the effects of interplant variability, samples will be generated from total plant tissue from a pool of 10 plants at GS 1.04. RNA will be purified using RNeasy kits from Qiagen. Experiment Overall Design: Number of plants pooled:10 Experiment Overall Design: Biological replicates: 4				
Protocol Name	P-G6166-1	P-G6166-3	P-G6166-2	Affymetrix:Protocol:Hybridization-Unknown	P-AFFY-6
Protocol Type	grow	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	hybridization	feature_extraction
Protocol Description	unknown; Parameter location = Growth Room; Parameter Atmosphere = Normal; Parameter Humidity = normal; Parameter Temperature = 22 Centigrade; Parameter Lighting = 18 h; Parameter Medium = M.S.   0.7% agar; Parameter Treatment = none; Parameter Nutrients = 1% sucrose; Parameter Stratification = 3 days at 4 centrigrade; Performer: Nick,,Jordan	Qiagen / Trizol; Protocol: Qiagen RNAeasy kit protocol ; Protocol Type = nucleic_acid_extraction; Performer: Nick,,Jordan	Preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA; RNA samples were quality controlled using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. 100 pmol T7-(dT)24 primer (5'-GGCCAGTGAATTGTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGGCGG-(dT)24-3')  was hybridized with the Total RNA ( 8 - 12ug) at 70Â&deg;C for 10 minutes. First strand cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription using 400 units SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase in a reaction containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.5 mM dNTPs at 42C for 1 hour.  The reaction was then put on ice for 2 mins, followed by second strand cDNA synthesis.  130ul of the second strand reaction mix was added to the 20ul  first strand synthesis reaction. The second strand reaction mix  contained 40 units E. coli DNA polymerase I, 10 units E. coli DNA ligase, 2 units  E. coli RNase H and 0.2 mM dNTPs in a buffer containing 20 mMTris-HCl (pH 6.9), 90 mM KCl, 4.6 mM MgCl2, 10mM (NH4)SO4 and 0.15 mM ÃŸ-NAD+. The reaction was incubated at 16 C for 2 hours.  10 units T4 DNA Polymerase was added and the reaction incubated for a further 5 minutes at 16 C, then the reaction was terminated using EDTA.  The double-stranded cDNA was cleaned up using the cDNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The double-stranded cDNA was used as a template for in Vitro transcription of biotin-labeled cRNA using the ENZO BioArray RNA Transcript Labeling Kit supplied by Affymetrix.  The Transcript Labeling kit produces large amounts of hybridizable biotin-labeled RNA targets by in Vitro transcription from bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  The reaction mixture containing Biotin-Labeled ribonucleotides (ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP with Bio-UTP and Bio-CTP), DTT, RNase inhibitor mix and T7 RNA polymerase was incubated at 37 C for 5 hrs, gently mixing every 30 minutes during the incubation. This produced an average of 40ug biotin-labeled cRNA . The biotin-labeled cRNA  was cleaned up using the cRNA Cleanup Spin Column supplied in the Affymetrix GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module.  The quantity and quality of the cRNA was measured using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. The total amount of cRNA was calculated, the starting quantity of RNA subtracted to give the quantity of adjusted cRNA.  The cRNA was fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis to break down full-length cRNA to 35-200 base fragments.  15ug of adjusted cRNA was used to prepare 300ul of hybridization cocktail of which 200ul was hybridized with the GeneChip.   ; Protocol Type = labeling; Performers: John,Y,Okyere, Janet,,Higgins	Title: Affymetrix Generic Hybridization. Description: 	Title: Affymetrix CEL analysis. Description: 
Protocol Parameters					
Protocol Hardware					
Protocol Software				MicroArraySuite 5.0	MicroArraySuite 5.0
Protocol Contact					
Protocol Term Source REF				mo	
SDRF File	E-GEOD-6166.sdrf.txt				
Term Source Name	NCBI Taxonomy	The MGED Ontology	ArrayExpress	EFO	mo
Term Source File	http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/	http://mged.sourceforge.net/ontologies/MGEDontology.php
Term Source Version					
