Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-48474						MAGE-TAB Version	1.1						Public Release Date	2014-06-03						Investigation Title	Dissecting physiological and transcriptional responses of nitric oxide to drought stress by increasing in vivo nitric oxide content in Arabidopsis						Comment[Submitted Name]	Dissecting physiological and transcriptional responses of nitric oxide to drought stress by increasing in vivo nitric oxide content in Arabidopsis						Experiment Description	"Nitric oxide (NO) is involved in all major environmental stresses. However, most of these understandings were mainly based on pharmacological study using NO modulator compounds. Recently, our studies together with others provided a new class of plant experimental system with specific in vivo NO release through constitutively overexpressing rat neuronal NO synthase (nNOS) in plants. In this study, we found that the nNOS transgenic Arabidopsis plants displayed lower level of H2O2 content, but higher levels of antioxidant enzyme activities and osmolytes under drought stress conditions. Transcriptomic analysis identified 490 and 20 genes that were differentially expressed in wild type (WT) and nNOS transgenic plants under control and drought stress conditions, respectively. Pathway analysis revealed that many genes involved in photosynthesis, cell, misc, co-factor and vitamin metabolism, major CHO metabolism, OPP and secondary metabolism were largely changed in nNOS vs. WT under control or drought stress conditions. Interestingly, CBF1/2 and 13 zinc finger family proteins, known as important family of transcription regulators in modulating several stress-responsive genes, were differentially expressed by nNOS transgenic effect. Additionally, some genes were commonly regulated by nNOS transgenic and abscisic acid (ABA) effects, indicating new insights to cross-talk between ABA and NO. Taken together, in vivo NO modulated antioxidant enzyme activities, osmolyte level, and the expression of genes involved in several pathways, thereby resulting in enhanced stress tolerance in nNOS transgenic plants. These observations might provide some insights to understand the physiological and molecular mechanisms of NO in response to drought stress in Arabidopsis. Two transgenic Arabidopsis lines (nNOS-2 and nNOS-25) with the nNOS gene under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S promoter, as well as Col-0 (WT), were used in this research. RNA samples from two nNOS transgenic lines were pooled for cRNA labelling and chip hybridization."						Comment[AEExperimentDisplayName]	Transcription profiling by array of Arabidopsis wild type (WT) and nNOS transgenic plants under control and drought stress conditions						Term Source Name	ArrayExpress	EFO					Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl					Person Last Name	Chan	Chan	Shi				Person First Name	Zhulong	Zhulong	Haitao				Person Email	zhulongch@wbgcas.cn						Person Affiliation	Chinese Academy of Sciences						Person Phone	86-27-87510823						Person Address	"Wuhan Botanic Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuchang Moshan, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China"						Person Roles	submitter						Protocol Name	P-GSE48474-1	P-GSE48474-5	P-GSE48474-6	P-GSE48474-2	P-GSE48474-3	P-GSE48474-4	P-GSE48474-7Protocol Description	"affylmGUI package (Wettenhall et al., 2006) rooted in R (Gentleman et al., 2004) Significant analysis of microarray (SAM) R software (Irizarry et al., 2003) was used to calculate the intensity ratios and fold changes. All the differential expressed genes with p-value below 0.05 and log2 fold change above 1 or below -1 were chosen for further analysis. ID_REF =  VALUE = log2 value, RMA signal intensity"	"For array hybridization, 200 ng of total RNA was used for first-strand cDNA synthesis and second-strand cDNA synthesis. Then aRNA cRNA was labeled with biotinylated ribonucleotide analog and was fragmented with fragmentation buffer using MessageAmpTM Premier RNA Amplification Kit (Ambion, #1792)."	"After purification, 12.5ug of labeled and fragmented cRNA probes were hybridized to the Arabidopsis arrays with Hybrization, Wash and Stain Kit (Affymetrix, #900720) according to manufacturers instruction."	"To conduct drought stress treatment, 2-week-old WT and transgenic plants in soil were subjected to drought condition (soil water deficit) by withholding water for 21 d and then re-watered."	"Two transgenic Arabidopsis lines (nNOS-2 and nNOS-25) with the nNOS gene under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S promoter (Shi et al., 2012c), as well as Col-0 (WT), were used in this research. After stratificated in deionized water at 4¡C for 3 days in darkness, the Arabidopsis seeds were sown in the plastic container filled with soil in the growth chamber. The growth chamber was controlled at an irradiance of about 120-150 µmol quanta m-2 s-1, 22-25¡C, with 65% relative humidity under 16 h light and 8 h dark cycles. To keep the well growth condition, nutrient solution was irrigated twice every week."	"For RNA isolation, 2-week-old WT and transgenic plants (nNOS-25) in pots were subjected to control condition (well-watered) and drought condition (soil water deficit) by withholding water for 14 d, respectively. The leaf samples of two replications at 14 d under control and drought conditions were harvested from at least 20 seedlings per genotype. Total RNA was extracted with TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) and quantified as previously described (Shi et al., 2012c), .then RNA was quantified and RNA quality was also determined using formaldehyde agarose gel and a 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) according to the manufacturers protocol."	"The arrays were scanned using GeneChip¨ Scanner 3000 (Affymetrix, #3000). The scanned images were saved as DAT files and transformed to JPG image. The signal intensities were extracted from the JPG image with Affymetrix¨ GeneChip¨ Command Console¨ Software (AGCC software) and saved as CEL files."Protocol Type	normalization data transformation protocol	labelling protocol	hybridization protocol	sample treatment protocol	growth protocol	nucleic acid extraction protocol	array scanning protocolExperimental Factor Name	genotype	treatment					Experimental Factor Type	genotype	treatment					Publication Title	Constitutive production of nitric oxide leads to enhanced drought stress resistance and extensive transcriptional reprogramming in Arabidopsis.						Publication Author List	"Shi H, Ye T, Zhu JK, Chan Z"						PubMed ID	24868034						Publication DOI	10.1093/jxb/eru184						Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE48474						Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2014-06-03						Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2013-07-02						Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2014-06-03						Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array						SDRF File	E-GEOD-48474.sdrf.txt						