Comment[ArrayExpressAccession]	E-GEOD-15555
Public Release Date	2009-04-10					
Investigation Title	ngatha mutant inflorescences					
Comment[Submitted Name]	ngatha mutant inflorescences
Experiment Description	Floral organ identities are specified by few transcription factors which act as master regulators. Subsequently, specification of organ axes programs the distribution of distinct tissue types within the organs that themselves develop unique identities. The C-class, AGAMOUS-clade MADS box genes are primary promoters of the gynoecium which is divided into a distal style and a subtending ovary along the apical-basal axis. We show that members of a clade of B3-domain transcription factors, NGATHA1 to NGA4 (NGA1-4), are expressed distally in all lateral organs, and all four have a redundant and essential role in style development. Loss of all four genes results in gynoecia where style is replaced by valve-like projections and a reduction in style-specific SHATTERPROOF1 (SHP1) expression. In agreement, floral misexpression of NGA1 promotes ectopic style and SHP1 expression. STYLISH1, an auxin biosynthesis inducer, conditionally activated NGA genes, which in turn, promoted distal expression of other STY genes in a putative positive feed back loop. Inhibited auxin transport or lack of YABBY1 gene activities resulted in a basally expanded style domain and broader expression of NGA genes. We speculate that early gynoecium factors delimit NGA gene response to an auxin-based signal, elicited by STY gene activity, to restrict the activation of style program to a late and distal carpel domain.  RNA was extracted from inflorescences of 30 day old plants using Qiagen RNAEasy kit. cRNA was synthesized and hybridized to Affymetrix ATH1 array according to manufacture recommendation. Seven repeats of wild type, two repeats of nga quadruple mutants and two repeats of 35S:amiR-NGA164a were collected. Signal values were obtained and normalized using the GC-RMA protocol, using R 2.7.2 (www.r-project.org) and Bioconductor 2.2 (www.bioconductor.org/). Average correlation values between repeats was 0.985, while the average correlation between wild type and mutant samples was only 0.972. As the average correlation between samples the nga quadruple mutants and 35S:amiR-NGA164a plants was 0.984, and given the identical phenotype, we grouped the two genotypes together.					
Date of Experiment						
Term Source Name	EFO
Term Source Version						
Term Source File	http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/efo.owl					
Person Last Name	Efroni	Alvarez	Goldshmidt	Efroni	Bowman	Eshed
Person First Name	Idan	John	Alexander	Idan	John	Yuval
Person Mid Initials	D.	P				
Person Email	idane@weizmann.ac.il					
Person Affiliation	Weizmann Institute					
Person Phone						
Person Fax						
Person Address	Weizmann Institute, Weizmann, Rehovot, Israel					
Person Roles	submitter					
Person Roles Term Source REF						
Person Roles Term Accession Number						
Normalization Type						
Normalization Term Accession Number						
Normalization Term Source REF						
Replicate Type						
Replicate Term Accession Number						
Replicate Term Source REF						
Experimental Design						
Experimental Design Term Accession Number						
Experimental Design Term Source REF						
Quality Control Type						
Quality Control Term Accession Number						
Quality Control Term Source REF						
Protocol Name	P-GSE15555-1	P-GSE15555-5	P-GSE15555-4	P-GSE15555-2	P-GSE15555-3	P-GSE15555-6
Protocol Description	ID_REF = <br>VALUE = GC-RMA signal	Standard affymetrix protocol 	Standard affymetrix protocol 	Using qiagen RNAEasy kit, according to manufacturer protocol	Standard affymetrix protocol 	Values obtained using using the GC-RMA protocol, using R 2.7.2 (www.r-project.org) and Bioconductor 2.2 (www.bioconductor.org/).
Protocol Software						
Protocol Hardware						
Protocol Contact						
Protocol Type	bioassay_data_transformation	image_aquisition	hybridization	nucleic_acid_extraction	labeling	feature_extraction
Protocol Term Source REF						
Protocol Term Accession Number						
Experimental Factor Name	GENOTYPE					
Experimental Factor Type	genotype					
Experimental Factor Term Source REF						
Experimental Factor Term Accession Number						
Publication Title						
Publication Author List						
PubMed ID	19435933					
Publication DOI						
Publication Status						
Publication Status Term Source REF						
Publication Status Term Accession Number						
Comment[SecondaryAccession]	GSE15555					
Comment[GEOLastUpdateDate]	2011-03-01
Comment[AEExperimentType]	transcription profiling by array					
Comment[GEOReleaseDate]	2009-04-09
Comment[ArrayExpressSubmissionDate]	2009-04-04
SDRF File	E-GEOD-15555.sdrf.txt
